
I don’t do it for the money. I’ve got enough, much 
more than I’ll ever need. I do it to do it. Deals are 
my art form. Other people paint beautifully on 
canvas or write wonderful poetry. 1 like making deals, 
preferably big deals. That's how I get my kicks. 

Most people are surprised by the way 1 work. I play 
it very loose. I don’t carry a briefcase. I try not to 
schedule too many meetings. 1 leave my door open. 
You can’t be imaginative or entrepreneurial if you’ve 
got too much structure. I prefer to come to work each 
day and just see what develops. 

There is no typical week in my life. I wake up most 
mornings very early, around six, and spend the first 
hour or so of each day reading the morning newspa- 
pers. I usually arrive at my office by nine, and I get on 
the phone. There's rarely a day with fewer than fifty 
calls, and often it runs to over a hundred. In between, 
I have at least a dozen meetings. The majority occur 
on the spur of the moment, and few of them last 
longer than fifteen minutes. I rarely stop for lunch. I 
leave my office by six-thirty, but I frequently make 
calls from home until midnight, and all weekend long 
It never stops, and I wouldn’t have it any other way. 
I try to learn from the past, but I plan for the future by 
focusing exclusively on the present. That’s where the 
fun is. And if it can’t be fun, what’s the point? 


MONDAY 

9:00 a.m. My first call is to Alan (‘Ace’ ’) Greenberg, 
on the trading floor of Bear Stems, a major Wall Street 
investment banking firm. Alan is the CEO of Bear 
Stems, he’s been my investment banker for the past 
five years, and he’s the best there is. Two weeks ago, 
we began buying stock in Holiday Inns. It was selling 
in the 50s. As of this morning, Alan tells me, I own 
just over one million shares, or slightly more than 4 
percent of the company. The stock closed Friday at 
$65 a share, mostly, Alan says, because word is out on 
the street that I’ve been a big buyer, and there's 
speculation I am planning a run at the company. 


The truth is I’m keeping my options open. I may 
ultimately go for control of Holiday, which I think is 
somewhat undervalued. At the current stock price, I 
could get control for less than $2 billion. Holiday’s 
three casino-hotels could be worth nearly that much— 
and the company owns another 300,000 hotel rooms 
besides. 

A second option, if the stock price goes high enough, 
is to sell my stake and take a very nice profit. If I did 
that today, Vd already be up about $7 million. The 
third possibility is that Holiday may eventually offer to 
buy back my shares, at a premium, simply to get rid 
of me. If the premium is big enough, Fll sell. 

In any case, I enjoy seeing the lengths to which bad 
managements go to preserve what they call iheii 
independence — which really just means their jobs. 

9:30 a*m* Abraham Hirschfeld calls me, looking for 
advice. Abe is a successful real estate developer but he 
wants to be a politician. Unfortunately for Abe, he’s a 
far better developer than politician. 

This fall, Abe tried to run for lieutenant governor 
against Governor Cuomo’s hand-picked candidate, Stan 
Lundine. Cuomo led a court fight to get Hirschfeld off 
the ballot on technical grounds, and sure enough, 
halfway into the campaign, the court ruled Hirschfeld 
out. Abe knows I’m friendly with the governor, and he 
wants my advice now on whether he should endorse 
Cuomo or switch parties and endorse Cuomo’s oppo- 
nent. I tell him it’s a no-contest question — stick with a 
winner and a good guy at that. 




4 ■ TRUMP: TOE ART OF THE DEAL 


We set a meeting for Thursday. 

10:00 a.m. I call Don Imus to thank him. Imus has 
one of the most successful radio shows in the United 
States on WNBC, and he’s been helping to raise 
money for the Annabel Hill fund. 

I’m amazed at how this has snowballed into such a 
media event. It began last week when I saw a national 
news report by Tom Brokaw about this adorable little 
lady from Georgia, Mrs. Hill, who was trying to save 
her farm from being foreclosed. Her sixty-seven-year- 
old husband had committed suicide a few weeks earli- 
er, hoping his life insurance would save the farm, 
which had been in the family for generations. But the 
insurance proceeds weren’t nearly enough. It was a 
very sad situation, and I was moved. Here were 
people who’d worked very hard and honestly all their 
lives, only to see it all crumble before them. To me, it 
just seemed wrong. 

Through NBC I was put tn touch with a wonderful 
guy from Georgia named Rank Argenbright, who’d 
become very involved in trying to help Mrs. Hill. 
Frank directed me to the bank that held Mrs. Hill's 
mortgage. The next morning, l called and got some 
vice president on the line. I explained that I was a 
businessman from New York, and that I was interested 
in helping Mrs. Hill. He told me he was sorry, but that 
it was too late. They were going to auction off the 
farm, be said, and “nothing or no one is going to stop 
it." 

That really got me going. I said to the guy: “You 


Dealing; A Week in the Life • 5 


listen to me. If you do foreclose. I’ll personally bring 
a lawsuit for murder against you and your bank, on the 
grounds that you harassed Mrs. Hill’s husband to his 
death." All of a sudden the bank officer sounded very 
nervous and said he'd get right back to me. 

Sometimes it pays to be a little wild. An hour later I 
got a call back from the banker, and he said, "Don’t 
worry, we’re going to work it out, Mr. Trump.” Mrs. 
Hill and Frank Argenbright told the media, and the 
next thing 1 knew, it was the lead story on the network 
news. 

By the end of the week, we’d raised $40,000. Imus 
alone raised almost $20,000 by appealing to his listeners. 
As a Christmas present to Mrs. Hill and her family, 
we’ve scheduled a mortgage-burning ceremony for 
Christmas Eve in the atrium of Thunp Tower. By then, 
I’m confident, we’ll have raised all the money. I’ve 
promised Mrs. Hill that if we haven’t. I’ll make up 
any difference. 

1 tell Imus he’s the greatest, and I invite him to be 
my guest one day next week at the tennis matches at 
the U.8. Open. I have a courtside box and 1 used to go 
myself almost every day. Now I’m so busy I mostly 
just send my friends. 

11:15 a.m. Harry Usher, the commissioner of the 
United States Football League, calls. Last month, die 
jury in the antitrust suit we brought against the Nation- 
al Football League ruled that the NFL was a monopo- 
ly, but awarded us only token damages of one dollar. 
I’ve already let the better players on my team, the 


I 


6 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


New Jersey Generals, sign with the NFL. But the 
ruling was ridiculous. 

We argue about the approach we should take. I want 
to be more aggressive. ‘‘What worries me," I say to 
Harry, "is that no one is pushing hard enough on an 
appeal.” 

12.00 noon Gerry Schoenfeld, head of die Shubert 
Organization, the biggest Broadway theater owners, 
calls to recommend a woman for a job as an office 
administrator. He tells me the woman specifically 
wants to work for Donald Trump, and I say she’s 
crazy but I’ll be happy to see her. 

We talk a little about the theater business, and I tell 
Gerry I’m about to take my kids to see Cats , one of 
his shows, for a second time. He asks if I’m getting 
my tickets through his office. I tell him that 1 don't 
like to do that sort of thing. "Don’t be silly,” he says. 
“We have a wom an here whose job it is to handle 
tickets for our friends. Here’s her number. Don’t 
hesitate to call." 

It’s a nice gesture from a very nice guy. 

1:15 p.m. Anthony Gliedman stops by to discuss 
the Wollman Rink project. Gliedman was housing 
commissioner under Ed Koch. At the time we 
fought a lot, and even though I ended up beating 
him in court, I always thought he was bright. I 
don’t hold it against people that they have opposed 
me. I’m just looking to hire the best talent, wherev- 
er l can find it. 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 7 


Tony has been helping to coordinate the rebuilding 
of the Wollman Skating Rink in Central Park, a 
project the city failed at so miserably for seven 
years. In June I offered to do the job myself. Now 
we’re ahead of schedule, and Tony tells me that 
he’s set up a press conference for Thursday to 
celebrate the last important step in construction: 
pouring the concrete. 

It doesn’t sound like much of a news event to me, 
and I ask him if anyone is likely to show up. He 
says at least a dozen news organizations have RSVPd 
yes. So much for my news judgment. 

2:00 p.m, i get deposed in a lawsuit we’ve brought 
against a contractor on Trump Tower. Halfway into the 
job we had to fire the company for total incompetence, 
and we’re suing for damages. I hate lawsuits and 
depositions, but the fact is that if you’re right, you’ve 
got to take a stand, or people will walk all over you. 
In any case, there’s no way I could avoid depositions, 
even if I never brought a lawsuit myself. Nowadays, if 
your name is Donald Trump, everyone in the world 
seems to want to sue you. 

3:0# p*m* I ask Norma Foerderer, my executive 
assistant and the person who keeps my life organized, 
to bring me lunch: a can of tomato juice. I rarely go 
out, because mostly, it’s a waste of time. 

3:13 p.m, I put in a call to Sir Charles Goldstein; 
he’s out, and 1 leave a message. He’s a successful real 



8 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 9 


estate attorney, but not one of my favorites, 

I'm pretty sure Charlie Goldstein is from the Bronx, 
but he's a very pompous guy and has a tendency to act 
like royalty, so I call him Sir Charles. Over the 
weekend, I heard that Lee lacocca had hired Sir 
Charles to represent him on a deal in Palm Beach 
where Lee and I intend to be partners. Lee had no way 
of knowing about my past experience with Sir Charles. 
A while back, 1 was in the middle of making a deal 
with a guy who needed an attorney, and I recommended 
Sir Charles. The next thing I knew. Sir Charles was 
recommending to his client that he not make the deal 
with me. 1 couldn't believe it! 

This deal is to buy two condominium towers in the 
Palm Beach area. 1 own a house in Palm Beach — a 
spectacular place called Mar-a-Lago— and one day last 
winter, when I was down for the weekend, I went out 
to have lunch with some friends. On the way, a pair of 
beautiful gleaming white towers caught my eye, I 
made a couple of calls. It turned out they'd been built 
for about $120 million and a major New York bank 
had just foreclosed on the developers. The next thing I 
knew I was making a deal to buy the project for $40 
million. 

A mutual friend, William Fugazy, first mentioned 
that Lee and 1 should do a real estate deal together. [ 
think Lee is an extraordinary businessman who has 
done wonders in turning Chrysler around, and I also 
like him a great deal personally. So one thing led to 
another and we began talking about the towers. It’s a 
substantial investment, and I'm not certain Lee is 


absolutely sure yet that he wants to go forward. If 
that's the case, it occurs to me, he’s done the perfect 
thing by hiring an attorney I don’t like. And that’s 
precisely what I intend to tell Sir Charles when he 
calls me back. 

3:30 p.m. I call my sister, Maryanne Barry, to 
discuss a recent decision in a lawsuit we are contesting 
in Atlantic City. Maryanne is a federal court judge in 
New Jersey, and her husband, John, is a talented 
attorney I have used on many occasions. 

"Can you believe they ruled against us?” I ask her. 
Maryanne is very smart, she obviously knows a lot 
more about the law than 1 do, and she’s as surprised as 
I am. 1 tell her that I’ve arranged to have all the 
materials from the case sent to John immediately, 
because I want him to handle the appeal. 

4:00 I go to our conference room to look at 

slides of potential Christmas decorations for the atrium 
in Trump Tower. The spectacular six-story marble 
atrium has become one of the leading tourist attrac- 
tions in New York City. More than 100,000 people a 
week come from all over the world to see it and shop 
in it, and it’s now a symbol of the Thimp Organiza- 
tion. That’s why I still get involved in details like 
what Christmas decorations we should use. 

i don't like most of what I’m shown. Finally, I see a 
huge and magnificent gold wreath for the entrance to 
the building, and decide we should use just that. 
Sometimes — not often, but sometimes — less is more. 



10 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life • 11 


4:30 p.m. Nicholas Ribis, a New Jersey attorney 
who handled the licensing of both my Atlantic City 
casinos, calls to say he's about to leave for Sydney, 
Australia; to pursue a deal I’m considering. He tells 
me it's a twenty-four-hour flight, and I tell him Fm 
very glad he’s going instead of me. 

The deal, however, may be worth the trip. The 
government of New South Wales is in the midst of 
choosing a company to build and operate what they 
envision as the world’s largest casino. We’re a front- 
runner for the job, and Nick is going over to meet with 
the key government people. He tells me he’ll call from 
Australia as soon as he has any news. 

5:15 f-m. I call Henry Kanegsberg, the NBC execu- 
tive in charge of choosing a new site for the network’s 
headquarters. We’ve been courting NBC for more than 
a year, trying to get them to move to our West Side 
yards site — seventy-eight acres along the Hudson Riv- 
er that I bought a year ago and on which I’ve an- 
nounced plans to build the world’s tallest building. 

I know Henry has just been shown our latest plans 
for the site, and I’m following up. I mention that 
Bloomingdale’s is dying to become the anchor store in 
our shopping center, which will give it real prestige. I 
also tell him the city seems very excited about our 
latest plans. Then I say we expect to get our prelimi- 
nary approvals in the next several months. 

Kanegsberg seems enthusiastic. Before I get off, I 
also put in a plug for NBC’s locating its offices in the 


world’s tallest building. “Think about it,” I say. “It’s 
the ultimate symbol.” 

5:45 p.m, My nine-year-old son, Donny, calls to ask 
when I’ll be home. I always take calls from my kids, 
no matter what I’m doing. I have two others — Ivanka, 
six, and Eric, three — and as they get older, being a 
father gets easier. I adore them all, but I’ve never been 
great at playing with toy trucks and dolls. Now, 
though, Donny is beginning to get interested in build- 
ings and real estate and sports, and that’s great, 

I tell Donny I’ll be home as soon as I can, but he 
insists on a time. Perhaps he’s got my genes: the kid 
won’t take no for an answer. 

6:30 p.m, After several more calls, I leave the office 
and take the elevator upstairs to my apartment in the 
residential part of Trump Tower. Of course, I have a 
tendency to make a few more calls when I get home. 


TUESDAY 

9:00 a,m. I call Ivan Boesky. Boesky is an arbitrageur, 
but he and his wife are also the majority owners of the 
Beverly Hills Hotel and I’ve just read that he’s decid- 
ed to sell it. I have no idea when I call that just two 
weeks from now Boesky will plead guilty to insider 
trading, and that the real reason he’s eager to sell the 
hotel is that he needs to raise cash fast. 


r 


12 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


My idea is to hire Steve Rubell and Ian Schrager, 
the creators of Studio 54 and the Palladium, to run the 
Beverly Hills Hotel for me. Steve's an incredible 
promoter, and he’d make the hotel hot as hell again. I 
get Boesky and tell him I’m very interested. He tells 
me Morgan Stanley and Company is handling the 
deal, and I will get a call from their people shortly. 

I like Los Angeles. I spent a lot of weekends there 
during the 1970s, and I always stayed at the Beverly 
Hills. But I won't let my personal preferences affect 
my business judgment. Much as I like the hotel. I’m 
interested in it only if I can get it for a much better 
price than they’re now asking. 

9:30 a.m. Alan Greenberg calls. We’ve bought an- 
other 100,000 shares of Holiday, and the stock is up 
another point and a half. Hading is very active. I tell 
Alan I’ve heard that the top guys at Holiday are in a 
panic and that they’re holding emergency meetings to 
discuss how to react to me. Alan says that he thinks 
Holiday will enact some kind of “poison pill” as a 
way of fending off any attempts I make at a hostile 
takeover. 

Our call lasts less than two minutes. That’s one 
thing I love about Alan: he never wastes time. 

10:00 A.M- I meet with the contractors in charge of 
building my 2,700-space parking garage and transpor- 
tation center across the street from Trump Plaza on the 
Boardwalk in Atlantic City* It’s a $30 million job, and 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 13 

they’re here to give me a progress report* They tell me 
we’re on schedule and under budget. 

The garage will be ready in time for Memorial Day, 
1987—the biggest weekend of the year in Atlantic 
City— and it’s going to increase out business enormously 
Right now we are doing well with virtually no parking* 
The new lot is located at the end of the main road 
leading to the Boardwalk, and it’s connected by a 
walkway to our casino. Anyone who parks in the 
garage funnels directly into our facility 

11:00 a.m- I meet with a top New York banker at 
my office. He’s come to try to solicit business, and we 
have a general talk about deals I’m considering* It’s 
funny what’s happened: bankers now come to me, to 
ask if l might be interested in borrowing their money. 
They know a safe bet. 

12:15 p*m* Norma comes in and tells me that we 
have to switch the Wollman Rink press conference 
from Thursday to Wednesday Henry Stem, the New 
York City parks commissioner, has a conflict: on 
Thursday he is also scheduled to dedicate a new 
Central Park playground on the Upper West Side, 
underwritten by Diana Ross, the singer* 

The problem is that there’s no way we can move our 
concrete-pouring, which was why we called the press 
conference in the first place. But what the hell? FI1 
wing it and things will work out* I’m reluctant to give 
Henry a hard time. Last week, my security force 
refused to let him into Wollman without my written 



14 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


permission. This was taking good security a step too 
far. As you can imagine, Henry wasn’t thrilled. 

12:45 P.M. Jack Mitnik, my accountant, calls to 
discuss the tax implications of a deal we’re doing. I 
ask him how bad he thinks the new federal tax law is 
going to be for real estate, since it eliminates a lot of 
current real estate write-offs . 

To my surprise, Mitnik tells me he thinks the law is 
an overall plus for me, since much of my cash flow 
comes from casinos and condominiums and the top tax 
rate on earned income is being dropped from 50 to 32 
percent. However, I still believe the law will be a 
disaster for the country, since it eliminates the incen- 
tives to invest and build — particularly in secondary 
locations, where no building will occur unless there 
are incentives. 

1:30 I tell Norma to call John Danforth, the 

Republican senator from Missouri. I don’t know Danforth 
personally, but he’s one of the few senators who 
fought hard against the new tax bill. It’s probably too 
late, but 1 just want to congratulate him on having the 
courage of his convictions, even though it might cost 
him politically. 

Danforth isn’t in, but his secretary says he ll call 
back. 

1:45 p*M. Norma sees an opening between calls, 
and she comes in to ask me about several invitations. 
Dave Winfield, the New York Yankee outfielder, has 


Dealing: A Week in the Life • IS 


asked me to be the chairman of a dinner to benefit his 
foundation, which fights drug abuse. I’m already chairing 
two dinners this month, one for United Cerebral Palsy 
and the other for the Police Athletic League. 

I don’t kid myself about why I’m asked to speak at 
or chair so many events. It’s not because I’m such a 
great guy. The reason is that the people who run 
charities know that I’ve got wealthy friends and can 
get them to buy tables. I understand the game, and 
while I don’t like to play it, there is no graceful way 
out. However, I’ve already hit up my friends twice 
this month — and there’s only so many times you can 
ask people to donate $10,000 for a table. I tell Norma 
to turn Winfield down, with regrets. 

The other invitation is from the Young President’s 
Organization, asking me to speak at a dinner they’re 
having. YPO admits businessmen under the age of 
forty who are chief executives of their companies. I 
turned forty two months ago, so in their eyes, I guess i 
now qualify as an elder statesman. 

Norma also asks me about a half dozen party 
invitations. I say yes to two. One is being given by 
Alice Mason, the real estate broker who has managed 
to turn herself into a major socialite by getting the 
hottest people to come to her parties. The other is a 
reception for two wonderful people, Barbara Walters 
of ABC and Merv Adelson, the head of Lorimar- 
Telepictures, who were married a few months ago in 
California. 

Frankly, I’m not too big on parties, because l can’t 
stand small talk. Unfortunately, they’re part of doing 



16 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 17 


business, so I find myself going to more than Fd 
like — and then trying hard to leave early* A few, 
fortunately, I enjoy. But more often I will accept an 
invitation many months in advance, thinking the date 
is so far off that it will never arrive* When it does, I 
get mad at myself for having accepted in the first 
place. By then it's usually too late to pull out. 

2:00 p-m. I get an idea and call Alan Greenberg 
again. My idea is based on the fact that if 1 make a 
takeover move against Holiday, I have to get licensed 
as a casino operator in Nevada, where Holiday owns 
two casinos. “What do you think,” I ask him, “about 
just selling out Holiday shares right now, taking a 
profit, and then rethinking a takeover bid after 1 get 
licensed?” 

Alan argues for holding tight with what we’ve got, I 
say okay, for now* I like to keep as many options open 
as I can. 

2:15 p.M> John Danforth calls back. We have a nice 
talk, and L tell him to keep up the good work. 

2:30 f*m. 1 return a call from one of the owners of 
the Dunes Hotel in Las. Vegas, They also own perhaps 
the best undeveloped site on the Vegas strip. For the 
right price, Fd consider buying it. 

I like the casino business. I like the scale, which is 
huge, I like the glamour, and most of all, I like the 
cash flow. If you know what you are doing and you 
run your operation reasonably well, you can make a 


very nice profit* If you run it very well, you can make 
a ton of money* 

2:45 My brother, Robert, and Harvey Free- 

man, both executive vice presidents in my company, 
stop by to report on a meeting they’ve had that day 
with Con Edison and executives from NBC about the 
West Side yards project. Con Ed has a large smoke- 
stack on the southern end of the site, and the meeting 
was to discuss whether the fumes from the stack 
would dissipate as effectively if a large building goes 
up adjacent to it. 

Robert, who is two years younger than I am, is 
soft-spoken and easygoing, but he’s very talented and 
effective* I think it must be hard to have me for a 
brother, but he’s never said anything about it and 
we’re very close. He is definitely the only guy in my 
life whom I ever call “honey," * 

Robert gets along with almost everyone, which is 
great for me, since I sometimes have to be die bad guy* 
Harvey is a different type: no-nonsense, not too big on 
laughs, but he’s got an absolutely brilliant analytic mind. 

The Con Ed people, I’m happy to hear, told the 
NBC executives that there is no reason to believe the 
presence of the NBC building will affect the smoke- 
stack. Unfortunately, Con Ed won’t be the last word. 
Before we can get our approvals, we’ll have to get an 
independent environmental-impact statement. 

3:15 p.m, I call Herbert Sturz of the City Planning 
Commission, which will be the first city agency to 



IB • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 

approve or disapprove our latest plan for the West Side 
yards. Sturz and his people are scheduled to have a 
preliminary look on Friday. 

He isn’t in, so I leave a message with his secretary. 

I just say I'm looking forward to seeing him Friday 
morning. 

3:20 p.m. Gerald Schrager calls. Jerry’s a top attor- 
ney at Dreyer & Traub, one of the best real estate 
firms in the country, and he’s handled nearly every one 
of my major deals since I bought the Commodore 
Hotel back in 1974. Jerry is more than an attorney. 
He’s an absolute business machine, and he can see 
through to the essence of a deal as fast as anyone I 
know. 

We talk about the Holiday Inns situation and 
several other deals that are in various stages. Like 
Alan Greenberg, Schrager isn’t big on wasting time. 
We cover a half dozen subjects in less than ten 
minutes. 

3:30 p.m. My wife, Ivana, stops in to say good-bye. 
She’s on her way to Atlantic City, by helicopter. I like 
to kid her that she works harder than I do. Last year, 
when I bought my second casino from the Hilton 
Corporation and renamed it Trump’s Castle, I decided 
to put Ivana in charge. She’s incredibly good at 
anything she’s ever done, a natural manager. 

Ivana grew up in Czechoslovakia, an only child. 
Her father was an electrical engineer and a very good 
athlete, and he started Ivana skiing very early. By the 


Dealing: A Week in the life * 19 


age of six she was winning medals, and in 1972 she 
was an alternate on the Czechoslovakian ski team at 
the Sapporo Winter Olympics. A year later, after 
graduating from Charles University in Prague, she 
moved to Montreal and very quickly became one of 
the top models in Canada. 

We met at the Montreal Sum m er Olympic Gaines in 
August 1976. I'd dated a lot of different women by 
then, but I’d never gotten seriously involved with any 
of them. Ivana wasn’t someone you dated casually. 
Ten months later, in April 1977, we were married. 
Almost immediately, I gave her responsibility for the 
interior decorating on the projects I had under way. 
She did a great job. 

Ivana may be the most organized person 1 know. In 
addition to raising three children, she runs our three 
homes — the apartment in Trump Tower, Mar-a-Lago, 
and our home in Greenwich, Connecticut — and now 
she also manages Trump’s Castle, which has approxi- 
mately 4,000 employees. 

The Castle is doing great, but I still give Ivana a 
hard time about die fact that it’s not yet number one. I 
tel] her she’s got the biggest facility in town, so by all 
rights it should be the most profitable. Ivana is almost 
as competitive as I am and she insists she’s at a 
disadvantage with the Castle. She says she needs more 
suites. She isn’t concerned that building the suites will 
cost $40 million. All she knows is that not hav ing 
them is hurting her business and making it tougher for 
her to be number one. I’ll say this much: I wouldn’t 
bet against her. 


20 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life • 21 


3:45 p.m. The executive vice president for market- 
ing at the Cadillac Division of General Motors is on 
the phone. He’s calling at the suggestion of his boss, 
John Gretenberger, the president of the Cadillac Mo- 
tors Division whom I know from Palm Beach. Cadillac, 
it turns out, is interested in cooperating in the produc- 
tion of a new superstretch limousine that would be 
named the Hump Golden Series. I like the idea. We 
set a date to sit down and talk in two weeks. 

4:00 p.m. Daniel Lee, a casino analyst for Drexel 
Burnham Lambert, stops by with several of his col- 
leagues to discuss being my investment bankers on a 
deal to purchase a hotel company. 

Michael Milken, the guy who invented junk-bond 
financing at Drexel, has called me regularly for the 
last several years to try to get me to bring my business 
to Drexel. 1 have no idea that Drexel is about to get 
enmeshed in the insider-trading scandal that will soon 
rock Wall Street. In any case, I happen to think 
Mike's a brilliant guy. However, Alan Greenberg is 
exceptional himself, and I'm loyal to people who’ve 
done good work for me. 

I hear Lee and his guys out on their deal, but in 
truth, it doesn’t excite me much. We leave it that I’ll 
get back to them. 

5:00 p.m. Larry Csonka, former running back for 
the Miami Dolphins, calls. He has an idea for keeping 
the USFL alive. He wants to merge it with the Canadi- 


an Football League. Lany’s both a bright and a nice 
guy, and he’s very enthusiastic, but he doesn’t con- 
vince me. If the USFL couldn’t get off the ground with 
players like Herechel Walker and Jim Kelly, how is 
Canadian football, with a lot of players nobody has 
heard of, going to help? We’ve got to win in the courts 
first, to break up the NFL monopoly. 

5:30 p.m. I call Calvin Klein, the designer, to con- 
gratulate him. Back when Trump Tower first opened, 
Klein took a full floor of offices for his new perfume 
line. Obsession. It did so well that within a year, he 
expanded to a second floor. Now he's doing better 
than ever, and so he’s taking over a third floor. 

I have a lot of admiration for Calvin, and I tell him 
so. He’s a very talented designer, but he’s also a very 
good salesman and businessman — and it’s the combi- 
nation of those qualities that makes him so successful. 

6:00 p.m. I draft a letter to Paul Goldberger, archi- 
tecture critic of the New York Times. A week ago, in a 
Sunday column, Goldberger gave a great review to the 
design of Battery Park City, the new development in 
lower Manhattan. He also called it “a stunning con- 
trast” to what he claimed we’re doing with the Televi- 
sion City project at the West Side yards. In other 
words, he killed us. 

There’s just one catch: we’re in the middle of 
designing our project with new architects and con- 
cepts, and nobody — including Goldberger — has seen 


22 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life • 23 


our new plan. He was knocking a design he hadn’t 
even looked at yet. 

“Dear Paul," I write. “Your recent article is an 
obvious ‘setup’ in preparation for the negative review 
you intend to do on Television City — no matter how 
great it is. Just think, if you are negative enough 
(which ! am sure you will be) you might even help 
convince NBC to move to New Jersey." 

My people keep telling me I shouldn’t write letters 
like this to critics. The way I see it, critics gel to say 
what they want to about my work, so why shouldn’t I 
be able to say what [ want to about theirs? 


WEDNESDAY 

9:00 a.m. I go with Ivana to look at a private school 
for my daughter. If you had told me five years ago that 
I’d be spending mornings looking at kindergarten 
classrooms, I would have laughed. 

11:00 a.m, I have a press conference for the Wollman 
Rink. When 1 get there. I’m amazed. There are at least 
twenty reporters and photographers milling around. 

Henry Stem, the parks commissioner, goes to the 
microphone first and he is very complimentary to 
me. He says that if the city had tried to undertake the 
current renovation by itself, “we would now be awaiting 
Board of Estimate approval for what Donald Thimp 
has already done.” 


When it’s my tum, I explain that we’ve laid twenty- 
two miles of pipes, that they’ve all been thoroughly 
tested and there are no leaks, that the project is ahead 
of schedule by at least a month, and under budget by 
about $400,000. 1 also announce that we’ve set a 
grand opening for November 1 3— and that we have a 
show planned for that day which wUl include most of 
the world’s great skaters. 

After I finish, the reporters ask a million questions. 
Finally Henry and I step down into the rink. If we 
can’t have a real concrete-pouring, at least we’ll have 
a ceremonial one. A couple of workmen pull over a 
wheelbarrow full of wet concrete and point it down 
toward us. Henry and I shovel some concrete onto the 
pipes while the photographers click away. 

As many times as I’ve done these things, I have to 
say I still find them a little ridiculous. Think of it: a 
couple of guys in pinstripe suits shoveling wet con- 
crete. But I like to be accommodating. As long as they 
want to shoot, I’ll shovel. 

12:45 p.m. The minute I get back to my office, 1 
start returning calls. I want to get as much done as 1 
can now, because I have to leave early for Trenton, to 
attend a retirement dinner for a member of the New 
Jersey Casino Control Commission. 

The first person I call back is Arthur Barron, the 
president of Gulf & Western’s entertainment group, 
which includes Paramount Pictures. Martin Davis, the 
chairman of G&W, has been my friend for a long 
time, and Barron apparently called in response to a 


24 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 25 


letter I wrote to Marty two weeks ago. In the letter I 
explained to Marty that I'd recently purchased a fan- 
tastic site and was in the midst of designing a building 
with eight motion picture theaters at its base, and I 
wondered if he might be interested in making a deal 
for them. 

“As you are aware,” I wrote, “there is no one I 
would rather do business with than Marty Davis.” 

That happened to be true, for Martin Davis is a truly 
talented man, but there are also a dozen other compa- 
nies who would kill to have eight theaters in a top 
location. In other words, if 1 can’t make a deal I like 
with Marty, I’ve got a lot of other options. 

As I anticipated, when I get Art Barron on the 
phone, he wants to set up a meeting to discuss the 
theaters. We make a date for the following week. 

1:30 p.m. I return a call from Arthur Sonnenblick, 
one of the city’s leading brokers. Three weeks ago, 
Arthur called to say he had some foreign clients who 
were interested in buying the West Side yards. He 
wouldn’t tell me their names, but he said they were 
serious people, and they were prepared to make me a 
very substantial offer for the site — far more than the 
$100 million I paid a year ago, 

I didn’t get too excited. On the contrary, I say to 
Arthur, “The bid sounds low. If you can get them 
higher, I might be interested.” Now Arthur’s calling to 
give me a status report. 

The truth is, I really don’t want to sell the yards at 
any price. To me, those one hundred acres overlooking 


the Hudson River are the best undeveloped real estate 
site in the world. On the other hand, I don’t want to 
rule out anything. Arthur tells me his clients are still 
very interested, that they may come up a little, but he 
doubts they’ll go much higher. “Keep pushing,” I tell 
him. 

2:00 p.m. The contractor who’s building my pool at 
Mar-a-Lago is on the phone. I’m busy, but I take the 
call anyway. We’re going to great lengths to build a 
pool in keeping with the original design of the house, 
and I want to make sure every detail is right. 

Buying Mar-a-Lago was a great deal even though I 
bought it to live in, not as a real estate investment. 
Mar-a-Lago was built in the early 1920s by Marjorie 
Merri weather Post, the heiress to the Post cereal for- 
tune and, at the time, Mrs. Edward E Hutton. Set on 
twenty acres that face both the Atlantic Ocean and 
Lake Worth, the house took four years to build and 
has 118 rooms. Three boatloads of Dorian stone were 
brought from Italy for the exterior walls, and 36,000 
Spanish tiles dating back to the fifteenth century were 
used on the exterior and the interior. 

When Mrs. Post died she gave the house to the 
federal government for use as a presidential retreat. 
The government eventually gave the house back to the 
Post Foundation, and the foundation put it up for sale 
at an asking price of $25 million. I first looked at 
Mar-a-Lago while vacationing in Palm Beach in 1982. 
Almost immediately 1 put in a bid of $15 million, and 
it was promptly rejected. Over the next few years, the 



26 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


foundation signed contracts with several other buyers 
at higher prices than I’d offered, only to have them fall 
through before closing. Each time that happened, I put 
in another bid, but always at a lower sum than before. 

Finally, in late 1985, I put in a cash offer of $5 
million, plus another $3 million for the furnishings in 
the house. Apparently, the foundation was tired of 
broken deals. They accepted my offer, and we closed 
one month later. The day the deal was announced, the 
Palm Beach Daily News ran a huge front-page story 
with the headline mar-a-lago’s bargain price rocks 

COMMUNITY. 

Soon, several far more modest estates on property a 
fraction of Mar-a-Lago’s size sold for prices in excess 
of $18 million. I’ve been told that the furnishings in 
Mar-a-Lago alone are worth more than I paid for the 
house. It just goes to show that it pays to move 
quickly and decisively when the time is right. Upkeep 
of Mar-a-Lago, of course, isn’t cheap. For what it 
costs each year, you could buy a beautiful home 
almost anywhere else in America. 

All of which is a long way of explaining why I take 
this call from the pool contractor. He has a small 
question about the matching of the Dorian stone we’re 
using for die decking and I care about every detail when 
it comes to Mar-a-Lago. The call takes two minutes, but 
it will probably save two days of work — and ensure that 
the job doesn't have to be ripped out and done over later. 

2:30 p.m. A prominent businessman who does a lot 
of business with the Soviet Union calls to keep me 


Dealing: A Week i n the Life • 27 

posted on a construction project I’m interested hi 
undertaking in Moscow. The idea got off the ground 
after I sat next to the Soviet ambassador, Yuri Dubinin, 
at a luncheon held by Leonard Lauder, a great busi- 
nessman who is the son of Estde Lauder. Dubinin’s 
daughter, it turned out, had read about Trump Tower 
and knew all about it. One thing led to another, and 
now I’m talking about building a large luxury hotel, 
across the street from the Kremlin, in partnership with 
the Soviet government. They have asked me to go to 
Moscow in July. 

3:00 p.m. Robert stops in, and we talk about several 
issues relating to NBC and the West Side yards. 

3:30 p.m. A friend from Texas calls, to tell me 
about a deal he’s got working. He happens to be a 
very charming guy — wonderful looking, wonderfully 
dressed, with one of those great Texas drawls that 
make you feel very comfortable. He calls me Donny, a 
name that I hate, but which he says in a way that 
somehow makes it okay. 

T\vo years ago, this same friend called me about 
another deal. He was trying to put together a group of 
wealthy people to take over a small oil company. 
“Donny,” he said, “I want you to invest fifty million. 
This is a no-Iose proposition. You’ll double or triple 
your money in a matter of months.” He gave me all 
the details, and it sounded very good. I was all set to 
go forward. The papers were being drawn up, and 



28 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 29 


then one morning I woke up and it just didn’t feel 
right. 

I called my friend back and 1 said, “Listen, there’s 
so mething about this that bothers me. Maybe it’s that 
oil is underground, and 1 can’t see it, or maybe it’s 
that there’s nothing creative about it. In any case, I 
just don’t want to go in.” And he said, "Okay, Donny, 
it’s up to you, but you’re missing a great opportuni- 
ty.” The rest is history, of course. Oil went completely 
to hell several months later, the company his group 
bought went bankrupt, and his investors lost every 
dime they put up. 

That experience taught me a few things. One is to 
listen to your gut, no matter how good something 
sounds on paper. The second is that you’re generally 
better off sticking with what you know. And the thud 
is that sometimes your best investments are the ones 
you don’t make. 

Because I held back, I saved $50 million and the 
two of us have remained friends. As a result, I don’t 
want to reject him outright on his new deal. Instead, I 
tell him to send up the papers. In reality. I’m not too 
likely to get involved. 

4:00 p.m, I call back Judith Krantz. You’ve got to 
give it to her: how many authors have written three 
number-one best-selling books in a row? She also 
happens to be a very nice woman. Trump Tower is the 
setting for her latest novel. I’ll Take Manhattan, and 
I’m a character in the book. At Judy’s request, I 
agreed to play the role of myself in a scene from the 


miniseries based on her book, and filmed at Trump 
Tower. 

Now Judy is calling to say that the scene, with 
Valerie Bertinelli, came off well. I’m happy to hear it, 
although I’m not about to quit my day job. Still, I 
figure it’s not a bad way to promote Thimp Tower — on 
national television, in a miniseries that runs during 
sweeps week and is virtually guaranteed to get huge 
national ratings. 

4:30 p.m. My last call is to Paul Hallingby, a partner 
at Bear Steams who handled the $550 million in bond 
issues we did successfully for our two casinos in 
Atlantic City during 1985. 

Now we’re talking about setting up something called 
the Trump Fund, through which we’d buy distressed 
and foreclosed real estate, particularly in the South- 
west, at bargain-basement prices. 

Hallingby tells me that he’s putting together a pro- 
spectus, and that he’s confident we’ll easily be able 
to raise $500 million in a public offering. What I 
like about the deal is that I’d retain a large equity 
position in any purchase we made, but I wouldn’t be 
at any personal risk, in the event that any of the 
deals went bad. What I don’t like is the idea of 
competing with myself. What happens, for example, 
if I see a piece of distressed property that I want to 
buy on my own but that might also be good for the 
fund? 

In any case, I’ll look at the prospectus. 

# * * 


30 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life • 31 


5:00 p.m. Fm driven to the 60th Sheet heliport, in 
time to catch a helicopter and be in Trenton for 
cocktails at 5:30 p.m. 


THURSDAY 

9:00 a.m. I sit down with Abe Hiischfeld* Basically, 
Abe feels hurt that Governor Cuomo personally led a 
fight to push him off the ballot. I tell Abe I understand 
how he feels, but that the governor is a good guy, and 
that in any event it would look ridiculous for Abe, who 
is a Democrat, to suddenly turn around now and endorse 
a Republican. I also point out that as a practical matter, 
Cuomo is going to win re-election by a landslide, and 
that it’s a lot better to side with a winner than a loser 
Abe is a pretty stubborn guy, but finally he says, 
“Look, why don’t you get the governor to call me?” I 
tell him I’ll do my best. Abe has always been consid- 
ered difficult. But I like him and his family a lot. 

10:15 A»Ma Alan Greenberg calls. The market is 
down 25 points less than an hour after opening. Alan 
tells me everyone’s a seller, that nearly all stocks are 
down, but that Holiday is holding Firm, 1 can’t decide 
whether I should be happy or sad* Part of me wants 
Holiday to drop off, so I can buy more at a better 
price. The other part of me wants it to go up, because 
at this point, every time the stock rises a point, l make 
a lot of easy money. 


10:30 a.m. Harvey Myerson, the attorney who han- 
dled our USFL antitrust case, comes in for a meeting. 
Harvey is an incredible trial lawyer. He took a case in 
which no one gave us a prayer going in, and he 
managed to win on antitrust grounds, even though we 
were awarded only token damages. 

Even so, Fve wondered, since the trial, whether 
perhaps Harvey was just a little too sharp for some of 
the jurors. Every day he’d show up in one of his 
beautiful pinstripe suits, with a little handkerchief in 
his pocket, and I’m just not sure how well that went 
over. 

Overall, I think he did as good a job as anyone 
could, and I still believe he’s our best hope on the 
appeal. One thing I like about Harvey is his enthusi- 
asm- He’s still absolutely convinced he’s going to win 
the appeal* 

11:30 a.m, Stephen Hyde calls. After I bought out 
Holiday Inns’ interest in the Trump Plaza Hotel and 
Casino in Atlantic City and took over the management 
in June, I hired Steve to run the facility* Steve had 
been working as a vice president for Stephen A. Wynn 
at the Golden Nugget. Wynn is one of the best gaming 
guys around, and my philosophy is always to hire the 
best from the best* After a long-running negotiation, I 
offered Hyde a bigger job and more money, and he 
said yes. I think he also liked the idea of working for 
me, and he didn’t mind leaving Steve Wynn* 

Wynn is very slick and smooth, but he’s also a very 


32 - TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing; A Week in the Life * 33 


strange guy* A couple of weeks ago, he called and 
said, “Donald, 1 just wanted to let you know that my 
wife and 1 are getting divorced*” So 1 said, “Oh, I’m 
sorry to hear that, Steve,” He said, “Oh, don't be 
sorry, it’s great, we’re still in love, it’s just that we 
don't want to be married anymore. In fact, she’s right 
here with me. Do you want to say hello?” I politely 
declined, 

Hyde is calling to report on the August figures for 
the Plaza, which just came in. He tells me that gross 
operating profit was just over $9,038,000 compared 
with $3,438,000 for the same period a year ago, when 
I was still partners with Holiday Inns, and they were 
managing the facility. 

“Not too bad,” I say to Steve, “considering we 
still don’t have any parking.” Still, I can’t resist 
razzing him a little: “Now all you’ve got to do is get 
the hotel in mint condition.” I’m a stickler for cleanli- 
ness, and last time I visited the hotel, I wasn’t totally 
happy. 

“We're working on it, Donald,” Sieve says good- 
naturedly* “It’s already improving,” 

12:00 noon I walk over to the Wollman Rink, to 
watch the pouring of the concrete. This morning all of 
the papers had stories about our press conference. 

When 1 get to the rink, it’s surrounded by a convoy 
of cement trucks lined up as if they’re in a military 
operation* HRH, the construction company in charge 
of the project, has done a fantastic job moving things 
along, but this has to be the most incredible sight yet: 


thousands of pounds of wet concrete being poured 
from truck after truck into this huge rink. It’s like 
watching the world’s biggest cake get iced. 

Even though the press conference was yesterday, I 
notice photographers and camera crews all over the 
place* This is the event everyone was waiting for. 

1:30 p*m. I sit down with a reporter from Fortune 
who is doing a story about real estate and the new tax 
laws — with me on the cover. Contrary to what a lot of 
people think, I don’t enjoy doing press, I’ve been 
asked the same questions a million times now, and I 
don’t particularly like talking about my personal life. 
Nonetheless, I understand that getting press can be 
very helpful in making deals, and I don’t mind talking 
about them. I just try to be very selective, Norma must 
turn down twenty requests a week from all over the 
world. Also, when I do give an interview, I always 
keep it short. This reporter is in and out in less than 
twenty minutes. If I didn’t limit myself, I could spend 
my life talking to the press. 

2:45 p*m. A friend of mine, a highly successful and 
very well known painter, calls to say hello and to 
invite me to an opening. I get a great kick out of this 
guy because, unlike some artists I’ve met, he’s totally 
unpretentious. 

A few months back he invited me to come to his 
studio. We were standing around talking, when all of a 
sudden he said to me, “Do you want to see me earn 
twenty-five thousand dollars before lunch?” “Sure,” 


! 


34 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life - 35 


I said, having no idea what he meant. He picked up a 
large open bucket of paint and splashed some on a 
piece of canvas stretched on the floor. Then he picked 
up another bucket, containing a different color, and 
splashed some of that on the canvas. He did this four 
times, and it took him perhaps two minutes. When he 
was done, he turned to me and said, “Well, that’s it. 
Tve just earned twenty-five thousand dollars. Let's go 
to lunch.” 

He was smiling, but he was also absolutely serious. 
His point was that plenty of collectors wouldn't know 
the difference between his two-minute art and the 
paintings he really cares about. They were just inter- 
ested in buying his name. 

I’ve always felt that a lot of modem art is a con, 
and that the most successful painters are often better 
salesmen and promoters than they are artists. I some- 
times wonder what would happen if collectors knew 
what 1 knew about my friend’s work that afternoon. 
The art world is so ridiculous that the revelation might 
even make his paintings more valuable! Not that my 
Mend is about to risk finding out. 

4:00 p.m. A group of us meet in our conference 
room to go over the latest plans for the West Side 
yards project, which we're scheduled to show to the 
city tomorrow morning. It turns out that Herb Sturz of 
the planning commission won’t be able to attend, but 
his key people will be there. 

There are perhaps fifteen people at this meeting, 
including Robert and Harvey Freeman, and Alexander 


Cooper and his team. Alex is the architect-city planner 
i hired two months ago to take over the design of the 
project, after it became clear that my original archi- 
tect, Helmut Jahn, just wasn’t making it with the city. 
I don’t know if the reason was his Germanic style, or 
the fact that he is based in Chicago rather than New 
York, or just that he’s a little too slick. I do know that 
he wasn't getting anywhere with the City Planning 
Commission. 

Alex, by contrast, was formerly a city planner 
himself and he’s almost a legend in that office. He’s 
also the guy who designed Battery Park City, which 
has gotten great press. Politically, he’s a much better 
choice than Helmut Jahn, and I’m a very practical guy. 

We’ve been meeting like this every week for the 
past couple of months to hash out a broad plan, 
including where to locate the residential buildings, the 
streets, the parks, and the shopping mall. Today Alex 
has brought preliminary drawings of the layout we've 
agreed on. At the southern end are the prospective 
NBC studios, adjacent to the world’s tallest building. 
Then, heading north, there are the residential build- 
ings, facing east over a boulevard, and west over a 
huge eight-blocfc-long shopping mall and out at the 
river. Every apartment has a great view, which I 
believe is critical. 

I am very happy with the new layout, and Alex 
seems happy too. I happen to think that tall buildings 
are what will make this project special, but I’m not 
naive about zoning. Eventually, I know, we’re going to 
have to make some concessions. On the other hand, if 


34 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 37 


the city won’t approve something I think makes sense 
economically. I’ll just wait for the next administration 
and try again. This site is only going to get more 
valuable. 

6:00 p.m. I excuse myself, because I am due at an 
early dinner, and it’s not the kind to be late for. lvana 
and I have been invited, by John Cardinal O’Connor, 
to have dinner at St. Patrick’s Cathedral. 

7:00 p.m. No matter whom you've met over the 
years, there is something incredible about sitting down 
to dinner with the cardinal and a half dozen of his top 
bishops and priests in a private dining room at St. 
Patrick’s Cathedral. It’s hard not to be a little awed. 

We talk about politics, the city, real estate, and a 
half dozen other subjects, and it’s a fascinating eve- 
ning. As we leave, I tell lvana how impressed I am 
with the cardinal. He’s not only a roan of great 
warmth, he’s also a businessman with great political 
instincts. 


FRIDAY 

6:30 a.m. I’m leafing through the New York Times 
when I come to a huge picture of the concrete being 
poured onto Wollman Rink. It’s on the front page of 

the second section. This story just won’t quit. 

* * * 


9:15 a.m. We meet with die city on the West Side 
yards project. Almost everyone from yesterday’s meet- 
ing is there, and we are joined by four city planners, 
including Rebecca Robinson and Con Howe, who -are 
directly in charge of evaluating our project. 

Alex does the presentation, and he’s very good. 
Mostly he emphasizes the things we know the city is 
going to like — the public parks, the easy access to the 
waterfront, the ways we’ve devised to move traffic in 
and out. The only time the density issue comes 
up — how tall the buildings will bet— Alex just says 
we're still working it out. 

When it’s over, we all agree it went very well. 

10:30 a.m. I go back to my office for a meeting to 
discuss progress on construction at Trump Parc, the 
condominium I’m building out of the steel shell of the 
Barbizon-Plaza Hotel on Central Park South. It’s an 
incredible location, and the building we're redoing 
will be a great success. 

The meeting includes frank Williams, my architect 
on the project, Andrew Weiss, the project m anag er, 
and Blanche Sprague, an executive vice president, 
who is in charge of sales. Frank, who is very soft- 
spoken, is a fine architect. Blanchette — my nickname 
for her — is a classic. She’s got a mouth that won’t 
quit, which is probably why she’s so good at sales. I 
like to tell her that she must be a very tough woman to 
live with. The truth is I get a great kick out of her. 

We start by talking about what color to use on the 
frames of the windows. Details like these make all the 


38 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life ■ 39 


differeace in the look and ambience of a building. 
After almost a half hour, we finally agree on a light 
beige that will blend right into the color of the stone. 1 
happen to like earth tones. They are richer and more 
elegant than primary colors. 

11:00 a.m, Frank Williams leaves, and we turn to a 
discussion of the demolition work at Trump Parc. 
Andy tells me it’s not finished, and that the contractor 
has just given us a $175,000 bill for “extras.” Extras 
are the costs a contractor adds to his original bid every 
time you request any change in the plan you initially 
agreed on. You have to be very rough and very tough 
with most contractors or they’ll take the shirt right off 
your back. 

I pick up the phone and dial the guy in charge of 
demolition at Trump Parc. “Steve,” I say when I get 
him, “this is Donald Trump. Listen, you’ve got to get 
your ass moving and get finished. You’re behind. I 
want you to get personally involved in this ” He starts 
to give me explanations but I cut him off. “I don’t 
want to know. I just want you to get the job done and 
get out. And listen, Steve, you’re killing me on these 
extras. I don’t want you to deal with Andy anymore 
on the extras. 1 want you to deal with me personally. If 
you try screwing me on this job, you won't be getting 
a second chance. I’ll never hire you again.” 

My second concern is the laying of floors. I ask 
Andy for the number of our concrete guy. ‘ ‘Okay, ’ ’ I 
say, only half joking, “I’m going to take my life in my 
hands now.” Concrete guys can be extremely rough. I 


get the number-two guy on the line. “Look,” I say to 
him, “your boss wanted this contract very badly. I 
was set to give it to someone else, but he told me he’d 
do a great job. 1 walked the site yesterday, and the 
patches you’re making aren’t level with (he existing 
concrete. In some places, they’re as much as a quarter- 
inch off.” 

The guy doesn’t have any response, so I keep 
talking. “Nobody has the potential to give you more 
work in the future than Trump. I’m going to be 
building when everyone else has gone bust. So do me 
a favor. Get this thing done right.” 

This time the guy has a response. “Every guy on 
the job is a pro,” he says. “We’ve given you our best 
men, Mr. Trump.” 

“Good,” I say. “Call me later and let me know 
how you’re doing.” 

12:00 noon Alan Greenberg calls to tell me that 
Holiday has gone ahead and enacted some “poison 
pill” provisions that will weigh the company down 
with debt and make it much less attractive as a take- 
over target. I’m not worried. No poison pill is going 
to keep me from going after Holiday Inn, if that’s 
what I decide I want to do. 

The market is still taking a drubbing. It was off 
80 points yesterday, and it’s down another 25 today. 
But Holiday is off only a point. Alan tells me that 
we’ve now bought almost 5 percent of the com- 
pany. 




40 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Dealing: A Week in the Life * 41 


12:15 p.Mi Blanche stays on after Andy leaves to 
get me to choose a print advertisement for TVump 
Parc. She shows me a half dozen choices, and I don’t 
like any of them. She is furious. 

Blanche wants to use a line drawing that shows the 
building and its panoramic views of Central Park. “I 
like the idea of a line drawing,” I tell hen “But I 
don’t like these. Also, I want a drawing that shows 
more of the building. Central Park is great, but ill the 
end I’m not selling a park. I’m selling a building and 
apartments.” 

12:30 p.m* Norma comes in, carrying a huge pile of 
forms I have to sign as part of my application for a 
Nevada gaming license. While Fm signing, Norma 
asks who I want to use as character references. I think 
for a minute, and tell her to put down General Pete 
Dawkins, a great Army football hero, a terrific guy, 
and a good friend who’s now an investment banker at 
Shearson; Benjamin Hollaway, chairman and CEO of 
Equitable Real Estate Group; and Conrad Stephenson 
of Chase Manhattan Bank. 

“Also,” I tell Norma, “put down John Cardinal 
O’Connor,” 

12:45 p+m, Ivana rings. She’s in the office and 
wants me to go with hei to see another school we’re 
considering sending our daughter to next fall. “Come 
on, Donald,” she says. “You haven't got anything 
else to do.” Sometimes I think she really believes it. 

“Actually, honey, Fm a little busy right now,” I tell 


her. It doesn’t work. Three minutes later she’s in my 
office, tugging at my sleeve. I finish signing the 
forms, and we go. 

2:30 p*M* Bill Fugazy calls. I like to call him Willie 
the Fug, but he doesn’t seem to appreciate it. Fugazy T s 
business is limousines, but he really should have been 
a broker. The guy knows everyone. He’s one of Lee 
Iacocca’s best friends, and he’s the person who 
recommended to the cardinal that he meet with me to 
discuss real estate and get to know each other better. 

Fugazy asks me how dinner went last night at St. 
Pat’s and 1 tell him it was great. Before we hang up, 
we set a golf date for the weekend. 

2:45 p.m. John D’Aiessio, the construction manager 
on my triplex in Trump Tower, comes by to discuss 
the progress. He is carrying drawings. Except for the 
third floor, where the kids are, and the roof, where 
someday I’m going to build a park sixty-eight stories 
up. I’ve gutted the whole apartment. In truth. I’ve 
gone a little overboard. First of all, 1 practically 
doubled the size of what I have by taking over die 
adjacent apartment. What I’m doing is about as close 
as you’re going to get, in the twentieth century, to the 
quality of Versailles. Everything is made to order. For 
example, we had the finest craftsmen in Italy hand- 
carve twenty-seven solid marble columns for the living 
room. They arrived yesterday, and they’re beautiful. 1 
can afford the finest workmanship, and when it comes 


42 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


to my own apartment, I figure, why spare any ex- 
pense? I want the best, whatever it takes. 

I look over the drawings with John and mark up a 
few changes. Then I ask him how the job is going, 
“Not bad,” he said. “We’re getting there. 1 ’ 

“Well, push, John,” I say, “Push hard.” 

3:30 f.m, A Greek shipping magnate is on the line. 
“How’s the shipping business?” I ask. He tells me he 
has a deal he'd like to discuss. He doesn’t say what it 
is, but with certain people you don't ask. If it wasn’t 
big, I assume he wouldn’t waste my time. We set a 
date. 

4:00 p.m. 1 get a call from a guy who sells and 
leases corporate airplanes. I’ve been considering buying 
a G-4, the jet that most corporations use. I tell the guy 
on the phone that I’m still interested in a plane, but 
that he should keep his eye out for a 727, which is 
what I really want. 

4:30 p.m. Nick Ribis calls from Australia. He tells 
me things are going very well on our negotiations to 
be designated builder and operator of the world’s 
largest casino. Nick fills me in on the details and says 
that we should know more by the following Monday. 
“Sounds great,” I tell him. “Call me before you fly 
back.” 

4:45 p.m. Norma tells me that David Letterman, the 
talk-show host, is downstairs in the atrium of Trump 


Dealing; A Week in the Life • 43 

Tower, filming a day in the life of two out-of-town 
tourists. He’d like to know if they could stop up and 
say hello. 

I almost never stay up late enough to watch letter man , 
but I know he’s hot. I say sure. Five minutes later, 
Letterman walks in, along with a cameraman, a couple 
of assistants, and a very nice-looking married couple 
from Louisville. We kid around a little, and I say what 
a great town I think Louisville is — maybe we should 
all go in together on a deal there. Letterman asks me 
how much an apartment goes for in Trump Tower. I 
tell him that he might be able to pick up a one- 
bedroom for $1 milli on 

“Tell me the truth,” Letterman says after a few 
minutes of bantering. “It’s Friday afternoon, you get a 
call from us out of the blue, you tell us we can come 
up. Now you’re standing here talking to us. You must 
not have much to do.” 

“Truthfully, David,” I say, “you’re right. Absolutely 
nothing to do.” 


2 

TRUMP CARDS 


The Elements 
of the Deal 


M y style of deal-making is quite simple and 
straightforward. I aim very high, and then 1 
just keep pushing and pushing and pushing 
to get what I’m after. Sometimes I settle for less than I 
sought, but in most cases I still end up with what I 
want- 

More than anything else, I think deal -making is an 
ability you’re born with. It's in the genes. I don’t say 
that egotistically. It’s not about being brilliant. It does 
take a certain intelligence, but mostly it’s about in- 
stincts. You can take the smartest kid at Wharton, the 
one who gets straight A’s and has a 170 IQ, and if he 

45 


T 


46 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


doesn’t have the instincts, he’ll never be a successful 
entrepreneur. 

Moreover, most people who do have the instincts 
will never recognize that they do, because they don’t 
have the courage or the good fortune to discover their 
potential. Somewhere out there are a few men with 
more innate talent at golf than Jack Nicklaus, or 
women with greater ability at tennis than Chris Evert 
or Martina Navratilova, but they will never lift a club 
or swing a racket and therefore will never find out 
how great they could have been. Instead, they’ll be 
content to sit and watch stars perform on television. 

When 1 look back at the deals I’ve made — and the 
ones I’ve lost or let pass — I see certain common 
elements. But unlike the real estate evangelists you see 
all over television these days, I can’t promise you that 
by following the precepts I’m about to offer you’ll 
become a millionaire overnight. Unfortunately, life 
rarely works that way, and most people who try to get 
rich quick end up going broke instead. As for those 
among you who do have the genes, who do have the 
instincts, and who could be highly successful, well, I 
still hope you won't follow my advice. Because that 
would just make it a much tougher world for me. 

Think Big 

I like thinking big. I always have. To me it’s very 
simple: if you’re going to be thinking anyway, you 
might as well think big. Most people think small. 


Trump Cards: The Elements of the Deal • 47 


because most people are afraid of success, afraid of 
making decisions, afraid of winning. And that gives 
people like me a great advantage. 

My father built low-income and middle- income build- 
ings in Brooklyn and Queens, but even then, I gravi- 
tated to the best location. When I was working in 
Queens, I always wanted Forest Hills. And as I grew 
older, and perhaps wiser, I realized that Forest Hills 
was great, but Forest Hills isn't Fifth Avenue. And so 
1 began to look toward Manhattan, because at a very 
early age, I had a true sense of what I wanted to do. 

I wasn’t satisfied just to earn a good living. I was 
looking to make a statement. I was out to build 
something monumental — something worth a big effort. 
Plenty of other people could buy and sell little brown- 
stones, or build cookie-cutter red-brick buildings. What 
attracted me was the challenge of building a spectacu- 
lar development on almost one hundred acres by the 
river on the West Side of Manhattan, or creating a 
huge new hotel next to Grand Central Station at Park 
Avenue and 42nd Street. 

The same sort of challenge is what attracted me to 
Atlantic City. It's nice to build a successful hotel. It’s 
a lot better to build a hotel attached to a huge casino 
that can earn fifty times what you’d ever cam renting 
hotel rooms. You’re talking a whole different order of 
magnitude. 

One of the keys to thinking big is total focus. I 
think of it almost as a controlled neurosis, which is a 
quality I've noticed in many highly successful entre- 
preneurs. They’re obsessive, they’re driven, they’re 




48 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Thimp Cards: The Elements of the Deal * 49 


single-minded and sometimes theyTe almost maniacal, 
but it's all channeled into their work. Where other 
people are paralyzed by neurosis, the people I’m 
talking about are actually helped by it* 

I don't say this trait leads to a happier life* or a 
better life, but it's great when it comes to getting what 
you want. This is particularly true in New York real 
estate, where you are dealing with some of the sharpest, 
toughest, and most vicious people in the world* I 
happen to love to go up against these guys, and 1 love 
to beat them. 


Protect the Downside and 
the Upside Will Take Caro of Itself 

People think I'm a gambler. I've never gambled in my 
life* To me, a gambler is someone who plays slot 
machines. I prefer to own slot machines. It's a very 
good business being the house. 

It’s been said that I believe in the power of positive 
thinking* In fact, I believe in the power of negative 
thinking* I happen to be very conservative in business, 
I always go into the deal anticipating the worst. If you 
plan for the worst — if you can live with the worst— the 
good will always take care of itself. The only time in 
my life I didn’t follow that rule was with the USFL, I 
bought a losing team in a losing league on a long shot. 
It almost worked, through our antitrust suit, but when 
it didn't, I had no fallback. The point is that you can’t 
be too greedy. If you go for a home run on every 


pitch, you’re also going to strike out a lot* I try never 
to leave myself too exposed, even if it means some- 
times settling for a triple, a double, or even, on rare 
occasions, a single* 

One of the best examples I can give is my experi- 
ence in Atlantic City* Several years ago, I managed to 
piece together an incredible site on the Boardwalk* 
The individual deals I made for parcels were contin- 
gent on my being able to put together the whole site* 
Until I achieved that, I didn’t have to put up very 
much money at all* 

Once I assembled the site, I didn’t rush to start 
construction. That meant I had to pay the canying 
charges for a longer period, but before 1 spent hun- 
dreds of millions of dollars and several years on 
construction, I wanted to make sure I got my gaining 
license. I lost time, but I also kept my exposure much 
lower* 

When I got my licensing on the Boardwalk site. 
Holiday Inns came along and offered to be my partner. 
Some people said, “You don't need them. Why give 
up fifty percent of your profits?” But Holiday Inns 
also offered to pay back the money I already had in the 
deal, to finance all the construction, and to guarantee 
me against losses for five years. My choice was 
whether to keep all the risk myself, and own 100 
percent of the casino, or setde for a 50 percent stake 
without putting up a dime. It was an easy decision. 

Barron Hilton, by contrast, took a bolder approach 
when he built his casino in Atlantic City* In order to 
get opened as quickly as possible, he filed for a 




50 * TRUMP. THE ART OF THE DEAL 


license and began construction on a $400 million 
facility at the same time. But then, two months before 
the hotel was scheduled to open, Hilton was denied a 
license. He ended up selling to me at the last minute, 
under a lot of pressure, and without a lot of other 
options. I renamed the facility Thimp’s Castle and it is 
now one of the most successful hotel-casinos any- 
where in the world. 


Maximize Your Options 

I also protect myself by being flexible. I never get too 
attached to one deal or one approach. For starters, I 
keep a lot of balls in the air, because most deals fall 
out, no matter how promising they seem at First, In 
addition, once I’ve made a deal, I always come up 
with at least a half dozen approaches to making it 
work, because anything can happen, even to the best- 
laid plans. 

For example, if I hadn’t gotten the approvals I 
wanted for Trump Tower, I could always have built an 
office tower and done just fine. If Fd been turned 
down for licensing in Atlantic City, 1 could have sold 
the site I'd assembled to another casino operator, at a 
good profit. 

Perhaps the best example I can give is the first deal 
I made in Manhattan. 1 got an option to purchase the 
Penn Central railyards at West 34th Street. My origi- 
nal proposal was to build middle-income housing on 
the site, with government financing. Unfortunately, the 


Hump Cards: The Elements of the Deal - 51 


city began to have financial problems, and money for 
public housing suddenly dried up. I didn't spend a lot 
of time feeling sorry for myself. Instead, I switched to 
my second option and began promoting the site as 
ideal for a convention center. It took two years of 
pushing and promoting, but ultimately the city did 
designate my site for the convention center — and that’s 
where it was built. 

Of course, if they hadn’t chosen my site, I would 
have come up with a third approach. 

Know Your Market 

Some people have a sense of the market and some 
people don’t. Steven Spielberg has it. Lee lacocca of 
Chrysler has it, and so does Judith Krantz in her way. 
Woody Allen has it, for the audience he cares about 
reaching, and so does Sylvester Stallone, at the other 
end of the spectrum. Some people criticize Stallone, 
but you’ve got to give him credit. I mean, here’s a 
man who is just forty-one years old, and he’s already 
created two of the all-time-great characters, Rocky and 
Rambo. To me he’s a diamond-in-the-rougb type, a 
genius purely by instinct. He knows what the public 
wants and he delivers it. 

I like to t hink I have that instinct. That’s why I 
don’t hire a lot of number-crunchers, and I don’t trust 
fancy marketing surveys. I do my own surveys and 
draw my own conclusions. I'm a great believer in 
asking everyone for an opinion before I make a deci- 



52 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


sioit. It's a natural reflex. If Fra thinking of buying a 
piece of property, I’ll ask the people who live nearby 
about the area — what they flunk of the schools and the 
crime and the shops. When Fm in another city and I 
take a cab, IT1 always make it a point to ask the 
cabdriver questions, I ask and 1 ask and I ask, until I 
begin to get a gut feeling about something* And that’s 
when 1 make a decision* 

1 have learned much more from conducting tny own 
random surveys than 1 could ever have learned from 
the greatest of consulting firms* They send a crew of 
people down from Boston, rent a room in New York, 
and charge you $100,000 for a lengthy study. In the 
end, it has no conclusion and takes so long to com- 
plete that if the deal you were considering was a good 
one, it will be long gone. 

The other people I don’t take too seriously are the 
critics — except when they stand in the way of my 
projects. In my opinion, they mostly write to impress 
each other, and they’re just as swayed by fashions as 
anyone else. One week it’s spare glass towers they are 
praising to the skies. The next week, they’ve rediscovered 
old, and they’re celebrating detail and ornamentation. 
What very few of them have is any feeling for what 
the public wants. Which is why, if these critics ever 
tried to become developers, they’d be terrible failures. 

Thimp Tower is a building the critics were skeptical 
about before it was built, but which the public obvi- 
ously liked. I’m not talking about the sort of person 
who inherited money 175 years ago and lives on 84th 
Street and Park Avenue. I’m taking about the wealthy 


'Thimp Cards: The Elements of the Deal - 53 


Italian with the beautiful wife and the red Ferrari* 
Those people — the audience I was after — came to 
Thimp Tower in droves* 

The funny thing about Thimp Tower is that we 
ended up getting great architectural reviews. The crit- 
ics didn’t want to review it well because it stood for a 
lot of things they didn’t like at the time. But in the 
end, it was such a gorgeous building that they had no 
choice but to say so, I always follow my own instincts, 
but I’m not going to kid you: it’s also nice to get good 
reviews. 


Use Your Leverage 

The worst thing you can possibly do in a deal is seem 
desperate to make it. That makes the other guy smell 
blood, and then you’re dead. The best thing you can 
do is deal from strength, and leverage is the biggest 
strength you can have. Leverage is having something 
the other guy wants. Or better yet, needs. Or best of 
all, simply can’t do without. 

Unfortunately, that isn’t always the case, which is 
why leverage often requires imagination, and sales- 
manship* In other words, you have to convince the 
other guy it’s in his interest to make the deal. 

Back in 1974, in an effort to get the city to approve 
my deal to buy the Commodore Hotel on East 42nd 
Street, I convinced its owners to go public with the 
fact that they were planning to close down the hotel. 
After they made the announcement, I wasn’t shy about 



54 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


pointing out to everyone in the city what a disaster a 
boarded up hotel would be for the Grand Central area, 
and for the entire city. 

When the board of Holiday Inns was considering 
whether to enter into a partnership with me in Atlantic 
City, they were attracted to my site because they 
believed my construction was farther along than that 
of any other potential partner, in reality, I wasn’t that 
far along, but I did everything I could, short of going 
to work at the site myself, to assure them that my 
casino was practically finished. My leverage came 
from confirming an impression they were already 
predisposed to believe. 

When I bought the West Side railyaids, I didn’t 
name the project Television City by accident, and I 
didn’t choose the name because I think it’s pretty- I 
did it to make a point. Keeping the television networks 
in New York — and NBC in particular — is something 
the city very much wants to do. Losing a network to 
New Jersey would be a psychological and economic 
disaster. 

Leverage: don't make deals without it. 

Enhance Your Location 

Perhaps the most misunderstood concept in all of real 
estate is that the key to success is location, location, 
location. Usually, that’s said by people who don’t 
know what they’re talking about. First of all, you 
don’t necessarily need the best location. What you 


lYump Cards: The Elements of the Deal * 55 

need is the best deal. Just as you can create leverage, 
you can enhance a location, through promotion and 
through psychology. 

When you have 57th Street and Fifth Avenue as 
your location, as I did with Trump Tower, you need 
less promotion. But even there, I took it a step further, 
by promoting Trump Tower as something almost larger 
than life. By contrast, Museum Tower, two blocks 
away and built above the Museum of Modem Art, 
wasn’t marketed well, never achieved an “aura,” and 
didn’t command nearly the prices we did at Trump 
Tower. 

Location also has a lot to do with fashion. You can 
take a mediocre location and turn it into something 
considerably better just by attracting the right people. 
After Trump Tower I built Trump Plaza, on a site at 
Third Avenue and 61st Street that I was able to 
purchase very inexpensively. The truth is that Third 
Avenue simply didn’t compare with Fifth Avenue as a 
location. But Trump Tower had given a value to the 
Trump name, and I built a very striking building on 
Third Avenue. Suddenly we were able to command 
premium prices from very wealthy and successful 
people who might have chosen Trump Tower if the 
best apartments hadn’t been sold out. Today Third 
Avenue is a very prestigious place to live, and Trump 
Plaza is a great success. 

My point is that the real money isn’t made in real 
estate by spending the top dollar to buy the best 
location. You can get killed doing that, just as you can 
get killed buying a bad location, even for a low price. 



56 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


What you should never do is pay too much, even if 
that means walking away from a very good site. 
Which is all a more sophisticated way of looking at 
location* 


Get the Word Oat 

You can have the most wonderful product in the 
world, but if people don't know about it, it’s not going 
to be worth much* There are singers in the world with 
voices as good as Frank Sinatra’s, but they're singing 
in their garages because no one has ever heard of 
them. You need to generate interest, and you need to 
create excitement. One way is to hire public relations 
people and pay them a lot of money to sell whatever 
you’ve got* But to me, that's like hiring outside 
consultants to study a market* It's never as good as 
doing it yourself. 

One thing f've learned about the press is that they're 
always hungry for a good story, and the more sensa- 
tional the better* It’s in the nature of the job, and I 
understand that* The point is that if you are a little 
different, or a little outrageous, or if you do things that 
are bold or controversial, the press is going to write 
about you* I've always done tilings a little differently, I 
don't mind controversy, and my deals tend to be 
somewhat ambitious. Also, I achieved a lot when I 
was very young, and I chose to live in a certain style. 
The result is that the press has always wanted to write 
about me. 


Trump Cards: The Elements of the Deal - 57 


I’m not saying that they necessarily like me. Some- 
times they write positively, and sometimes they write 
negatively- But from a pure business point of view, the 
benefits of being written about have far outweighed 
the drawbacks. It's really quite simple. If I take a 
full-page ad in the New York Times to publicize a 
project, it might cost $40,000, and in any case, people 
tend to be skeptical about advertising. But if the New 
York Times writes even a moderately positive one- 
column story about one of my deals, it doesn't cost me 
anything, and it’s worth a lot more than $40,000, 

The funny thing is that even a critical story, which 
may be hurtful personally, can be very valuable to 
your business. Television City is a perfect example. 
When I bought the land in 1985, many people, even 
those on the West Side, didn’t realize that those one 
hundred acres existed. Then I announced I was going 
to build the world’s tallest building on the site. In- 
stantly, it became a media event: the New York Times 
put it on the front page, Dan Rather announced it on 
the evening news, and George Will wrote a column 
about it in Newsweek. Every architecture critic had an 
opinion, and so did a lot of editorial writers. Not all of 
them liked the idea of the world’s tallest building* But 
the point is that we got a lot of attention, and that 
alone creates value. 

The other thing I do when 1 talk with reporters is to 
be straight. I try not to deceive them or to be defen- 
sive, because those are precisely the ways most people 
get themselves into trouble with the press. Instead, 
when a reporter asks me a tough question, I try to 



58 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Trump Cards: The Elements of the Deal * 59 


frame a positive answer, even if that means shifting 
the ground. For example, if someone asks me what 
negative effects the world’s tallest building might have 
on the West Side, 1 turn the tables and talk about how 
New Yorkers deserve the world’s tallest building, and 
what a boost it will give the city to have that honor 
again. When a reporter asks why I build only for the 
rich, I note that the rich aren’t the only ones who 
benefit from my buildings. I explain that I put thou- 
sands of people to work who might otherwise be 
collecting unemployment, and that I add to the city’s 
tax base every time I build a new project. 1 also point 
out that buildings like Triunp Tower have helped spark 
New York’s renaissance. 

The final key to the way I promote is bravado. I 
play to people’s fantasies. People may not always 
think big themselves, but they can still get very 
excited by those who do. That’s why a little hyperbole 
never hurts, People want to believe that something is 
the biggest and the greatest and the most spectacular. 

I call it truthful hyperbole. It’s an innocent form of 
exaggeration — and a very effective form of promotion. 

Fight Back 

Much as it pays to emphasize the positive, there are 
time s when the only choice is confrontation. In most 
cases I’m very easy to get along with. I’m very good 
to people who are good to me. But when people treat 
me badly or unfairly or try to take advantage of me, 


my general attitude, all my life, has been to fight back 
very hard. Hie risk is that you’ll make a bad situation 
worse, and I certainly don’t recommend this approach 
to everyone. But my experience is that if you’re 
fighting for something you believe in — even if it 
means alienating some people along the way — things 
usually work out for the best in the end. 

When the city unfairly denied me, on Trump Tower, 
the standard tax break every developer had been get- 
ting, I fought them in six different courts. It cost me a 
lot of money, I was considered highly likely to lose, 
and people told me it was a no-win situation political- 
ly. I would have considered it worth the effort regard- 
less of the outcome. In this case, I won — which made 
it even better. 

When Holiday Inns, once my partners at the Trump 
Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City, ran a casino 
that consistently performed among the bottom 50 per- 
cent of casinos in town, I fought them very hard and 
they finally sold out their share to me. Then I began to 
think about trying to take over the Holiday Inns 
company altogether. 

Even if I never went on the offensive, there are a lot 
of people gunning for me now. One of the problems 
when you become successful is that jealousy and envy 
inevitably follow. There are people — I categorize them 
as life’s losers — who get their sense of accomplish- 
ment and achievement from trying to stop others. As 
far as I’m concerned, if they had any real ability they 
wouldn’t be fighting me, they’d be doing something 
constructive themselves. 


60 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Trump Cards: The Elements o t the Deal * 61 


Deliver the Goods 

You can’t con people, at least not for long. You can 
create excitement, you can do wonderful promotion 
and get all kinds of press, and you can throw in a little 
hyperbole. But if you don't deliver the goods, people 
will eventually catch on. 

I think of Jimmy Carter. After he Lost the election to 
Ronald Reagan, Carter came to see me in my office. 
He told me he was seeking contributions to the Jimmy 
Carter Library. I asked how much he had in mind. 
And he said, “Donald, I would be very appreciative if 
you contributed five million dollars.” 

I was dumbfounded. I didn’t even answer him. 

But that experience also taught me something. Until 
then. I’d never understood how Jimmy Carter became 
president. The answer is that as poorly qualified as We 
was for the job, Jimmy Carter had the nerve, the guts, 
the balls, to ask for something extraordinary. That 
ability above all helped him get elected president. But 
then, of course, the American people caught on pretty 
quickly that Carter couldn’t do the job, and he lost in a 
landslide when he ran for reelection. 

Ronald Reagan is another example. He is so smooth 
and so effective a performer that he completely won 
over the American people. Only now, nearly seven 
years later, are people beginning to question whether 
there's anything beneath that smile. 

I see the same thing in my business, which is full of 


people who talk a good game but don’t deliver. When 
flump Tower became successful, a lot of developers 
got the idea of imitating our atrium, and they ordered 
their architects to come up with a design. The draw- 
ings would come back, and they would start costing 
out the job. 

What they discovered is that the bronze escalators 
were going to cost a million dollars extra, and the 
waterfall was going to cost two million dollars, and 
the marble was going to cost many millions more. 
They saw that it all added up to many millions of 
dollars, and all of a sudden these people with these 
great ambitions would decide, well, let’s forget about 
the atri um . 

The dollar always talks in the end. I'm lucky, 
because I work in a very, very special niche, at the top 
of the market, and I can afford to spend top dollar to 
build the best. I promoted the hell out of Thump 
Tower, but I also had a great product to promote. 

Contain the Costs 

I believe in spending what you have to. But I also 
believe in not spending more than you should. When I 
was building low-income housing, the most important 
thing was to gel it built quickly, inexpensively, and 
adequately, so you could rent it out and make a few 
bucks. That's when I learned to be cost-conscious. 1 
never threw money around. I learned from my father 



62 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Thunp Cards: The Elements of the Deal • 63 


that every penny counts, because before too long your 
pennies turn into dollars. 

To this day, if I feel a contractor is overcharging me, 
ril pick up the phone, even if it's only for $5,000 or 
$10,000, and I’ll complain. People say to me, “What 
are yon bothering for, over a few bucks?” My answer 
is that the day I can't pick up the telephone and make 
a twenty-five-cent call to save $10,000 is the day I'm 
going to close up shop. 

The point is that you can dream great dreams, but 
they'll never amount to much if you can’t turn them 
into reality at a reasonable cost. At the time I built 
Thimp Plaza in Atlantic City, banks were reluctant to 
finance new construction at all, because almost every 
casino up to then had experienced tens of millions of 
dollars in cost overruns. We brought Trump Plaza in 
on budget, and on time. As a result, we were able to 
open for Memorial Day weekend, the start of the high 
season. By contrast, Bob Guccione of Penthouse has 
been trying for the past seven years to build a casino 
on the Boardwalk site right next to ours. All he has to 
show for his efforts is a rusting half-built frame and 
tens of millions of dollars in lost revenues and squandered 
carrying costs. 

Even small jobs can get out of control if you're not 
attentive. For nearly seven years 1 watched from the 
window of my office as the city tried to rebuild Wollman 
Rink in Central Park. At the end of that time, millions 
of dollars had been wasted and the job was farther 
from being completed than when the work began. They 
were all set to rip out the concrete and start over when 


I finally couldn’t stand it anymore, and I offered to do 
it myself. The job took four months to complete at a 
fraction of the city’s cost. 

But Fun 

I don't kid myself. Life is very fragile, and success 
doesn't change that. If anything, success makes it 
more fragile. Anything can change, without warning, 
and that's why I try not to take any of what's happened 
too seriously. Money was never a big motivation for 
me, except as a way to keep score. The real excite- 
ment is playing the game. I don't spend a lot of time 
worrying about what I should have done differently, or 
what’s going to happen next. If you ask me exactly 
what the deals I + m about to describe all add up to in 
the end, I’m not sure I have a very good answer. 
Except that I've had a very good time making them. 




3 

GROWING UP 


T he most important influence on me, grow- 
ing up, was my father, Fred Trump. I learned a 
lot from him. I learned about toughness in a very 
tough business, 1 learned about motivating people, and 
I learned about competence and efficiency: get in, get 
it done, get it done right, and get out. 

At the same time, I learned very early on that I 
didn’t want to be in the business my father was in. He 
did very well building rent-controlled and rent-stabilized 
housing in Queens and Brooklyn, but it was a very 
tough way to make a buck. 1 wanted to try something 
grander, more glamorous, and more exciting. I also 

65 



66 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Growing Up • 67 


realized that if I ever wanted to be known as more 
than Fred Trump’s son, I was eventually going to have 
to go out and make my own mark. I’m fortunate that 
my father was content to stay with what he knew and 
did so well. That left me free to make my mark in 
Manhattan, Even so, 1 never forgot the lessons 1 
learned at my father’s side. 

His story is classic Horatio Alger. Fred Trump was 
bom in New Jersey in 1905, His father, who came 
here from Sweden as a child, owned a moderately 
successful restaurant, but he was also a hard liver and 
a hard drinker, and he died when my father was eleven 
years old. My father’s mother, Elizabeth, went to 
work as a seamstress to support her three children. 
The oldest, also named Elizabeth, was sixteen at the 
time, and the youngest, John, was nine. My father 
was the middle child but the first son, and he became 
the man of the house. Almost immediately, he began 
taking odd jobs — everything from deliveries for a local 
fruit store to shining shoes to hauling lumber on a 
construction site. Construction always interested him, 
and during high school he began taking night classes 
in carpentry, plan-reading, and estimating, figuring 
that if he learned a trade, he’d always be able to make 
a living. By the age of sixteen, he’d built his first 
structure, a two-car frame garage for a neighbor. 
Middle-class people were just beginning to buy cars, 
few homes had attached garages, and my father was 
soon able to establish a very good new business 
building prefabricated garages for fifty dollars apiece. 

He graduated from high school in 1922, and with a 


family to support, he couldn’t even consider college. 
Instead, he went to work as a carpenter’s helper for a 
home-builder in Queens. He was better with his hands 
than most, but he also had some other advantages. For 
starters, he was just a very smart guy. Even to this day, 
he can add five columns of numbers in his head and 
keep them all straight. Between his night courses and 
his basic common sense, he was able to show the 
other carpenters, most of whom had no education at 
all, shortcuts, such as how to frame a rafter with a 
steel square. 

In addition, my father was always very focused and 
very ambitious. Most of his co- workers were happy 
just to have a job. My father not only wanted to work, 
he also wanted to do well and to get ahead. Finally, 
my father just plain loved working. From as early as 1 
can remember, my father would say to me, “The most 
important thing in life is to love what you’re doing, 
because that’s the only way you’ll ever be really good 
at it.’’ 

One year after he got out of high school, my father 
built his first home, a one-family house in Woodhaven, 
Queens. It cost a little less than $5,000 to build, and 
he sold it for $7,500. He called his company Elizabeth 
Trump & Son because at the time he wasn’t of age, 
and his mother had to sign all his legal documents and 
checks. As soon as he sold his first house, he used the 
profit to build another, and then another and another, 
in working-class Queens communities like Woodhaven, 
Hollis, and Queens Village. For working people who’d 
spent their lives in small, crowded apartments, my 



68 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Crowing Up * 69 


father offered a whole new life-style: modestly priced 
suburban-style brick houses. They were gobbled up as 
fast as he could build them. 

Instinctively, my father began to think bigger. By 
1929, aiming at a more affluent market, he started 
building much larger homes. Instead of tiny brick 
houses, he put up three-story Colonials, TUdors, and 
Victorians in a section of Queens that ultimately be- 
came known as Jamaica Estates — and where, eventu- 
ally, he built a home for our family. When the Depres- 
sion hit and the housing market fell off, my father 
turned his attention to other businesses. He bought a 
bankrupt mortgage-servicing company and sold it at a 
profit a year later. Next, he built a self-service super- 
market in Woodhaven, one of the first of its kin d. All 
the local tradesmen — butcher, tailor, shoemaker — rented 
concessions in the space, and the convenience of 
having everything available under one roof made the 
operation an immediate success. W ithin a year, how- 
ever, eager to return to building, my father sold out to 
King Kullen for a large profit. 

By 1934 the Depression was finally beg innin g to 
ease, hut money was still tight and so my father 
decided to go back to building lower-priced homes. 
This time he chose the depressed Flatbush area of 
Brooklyn, where land was cheap and he sensed there 
was a lot of room for growth. Once again his instincts 
were right. In three weeks he sold 78 homes, and 
during the next dozen years, he built 2,500 more 
throughout Queens and Brooklyn. He was becoming 
very successful. 


In 1936 my father married my wonderful mother, 
Mary MacLeod, and they began a family. My father's 
success also made it possible for him to give to his 
younger brother something he’d missed himself: a 
college education. With my father’s help, my uncle, 
John Trump, went to college, got his Ph.D. from 
M.I.T., and eventually became a full professor of 
physics and one of the country’s great scientists. 
Perhaps because my father never got a college degree 
himself, he continued to view people who had one 
with a respect that bordered on awe. In most cases 
they didn’t deserve it. My father could run circles 
around most academics and be would have done very 
well in college, if he’d been able to go. 

We had a very traditional family. My father was the 
power and the breadwinner, and my mother was the 
perfect housewife. That didn’t mean she sat around 
playing bridge and talking on the phone. There were 
five children in all, and besides taking care of us, she 
cooked and cleaned and darned socks and did charity 
work at the local hospital. We lived in a large house, 
but we never thought of ourselves as rich kids. We 
were brought up to know the value of a dollar and to 
appreciate the importance of hard work. Our family 
was always very close, and to this day they are my 
closest friends. My parents had no pretensions. My 
father still works out of a small, modest back office on 
Avenue Z in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn, 
in a building he put up in 1948. It’s simply never 
occurred to him to move. 

My sister Maryanne was the first bom, and when 




70 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Crowing Up • 71 


she graduated from Mount Holyoke College, she followed 
my mother’s path at first, marrying and staying at 
home while her son grew up. But she also inherited a 
lot of my father’s drive and ambition, and when her 
son David became a teenager, she went back to school, 
to study law. She graduated with honors, began with a 
private firm, worked for five years as a federal prose- 
cutor in the U S. Attorney’s Office, and four years ago 
became a federal judge. Maryanne is really something. 
My younger sister, Elizabeth, is kind and bright but 
less ambitious, and she works at Chase Manhattan 
Bank in Manhattan. 

My older brother, Freddy, the first son, had perhaps 
the hardest time in our family. My father is a wonder- 
ful man, but he is also very much a business guy and 
strong and tough as hell. My brother was just the 
opposite. Handsome as could be, he loved parties and 
had a great, warm personality and a real zest for life. 
He didn’t have an enemy in the world. Naturally, my 
father very much wanted his oldest son in the busi- 
ness, but unfortunately, business just wasn’t for freddy. 
He went to work with my father reluctantly, and he 
never had a feel for real estate. He wasn’t the kind of 
guy who could stand up to a killer contractor or 
negotiate with a rough supplier. Because my father 
was so strong, there were inevitably confrontations 
between the two of them. In most cases, Freddy came 
out on the short end. 

Eventually, it became clear to all of us that it wasn’t 
working, and Freddy went off to pursue what he loved 
most — flying airplanes. He moved to Florida, became 


a professional pilot, and flew for TWA. He also loved 
fishing and boating. Freddy was probably happiest 
during that period in his life, and yet I can remember 
saying to him, even though I was eight years younger, 
“Come on, Freddy, what are you doing? You’re wast- 
ing your time.’’ I regret now that I ever said that. 

Perhaps I was just too young to realize that it was 
irrelevant what my father or I thought about what 
Freddy was doing. What mattered was that he enjoyed 
it. Along the way, I think Freddy became discouraged, 
and he started to drink, and that led to a downward 
spiral. At the age of forty-three, he died. It’s very sad, 
because he was a wonderful guy who never quite 
found himself. In many ways he had it all, but the 
pressures of our particular family were not for him. I 
only wish I had realized this sooner. 

Fortunately for me, I was drawn to business very 
early, and I was never intimidated by my father, the 
way most people were. I stood up to him, and he 
respected that. We had a relationship that was almost 
businesslike. I sometimes wonder if we’d have gotten 
along so well if I hadn’t been as business-oriented as I 
am. 

Even in elementary school, I was a very assertive, 
aggressive kid. In the second grade 1 actually gave a 
teacher a black eye — 1 punched my music teacher 
because I didn’t think he knew anything about music 
and I almost got expelled. I’m not proud of that, but 
it’s dear evidence that even early on I had a tendency 
to stand up and make my opinions known in a very 



72 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Crowing Up * 73 


forceful way. The difference now is that I like to use 
my brain instead of my fists. 

I was always something of a leader in my neighbor- 
hood. Much the way it is today, people either liked me 
a lot, or they didn't like me at all. In my own crowd I 
was very well liked, and I tended to be the kid that 
others followed. As an adolescent I was mostly inter- 
ested in creating mischief, because for some reason I 
liked to stir things up, and I liked to test people. Vd 
throw water balloons, shoot spitballs, and make a 
ruckus in the schoolyard and at birthday parties. It 
wasn’t malicious so much as it was aggressive. My 
brother Robert likes to tell the story of the time when 
it became clear to him where 1 was headed. 

Robert is two years younger than I am, and we have 
always been very close, although he is much quieter 
and more easygoing than I am. One day we were in 
the playroom of our house, building with blocks. I 
wanted to build a very tall building, but it turned out 
that I didn't have enough blocks. I asked Robert if I 
could borrow some of his, and he said, ‘‘Okay, but 
you have to give them back when you’re done.” I 
ended up using all of my blocks, and then all of his, 
and when I was done, I’d created a beautiful building. 
I liked it so much that I glued the whole thing 
together. And that was the end of Robert's blocks. 

When I turned thirteen, my father decided to send 
me to a military school, assuming that a little military 
training might be good for me. I wasn’t thrilled about 
the idea, but it turned out he was right. Beginning in 
the eighth grade I went to the New York Military 


Academy in upstate New York. I stayed through my 
senior year, and along the way I learned a lot about 
discipline, and about channeling my aggression into 
achievement. In my senior year I was appointed a 
captain of the cadets. 

There was one teacher in particular who had a big 
impact on me. Theodore Dobias was a former drill 
sergeant in the marines, and physically he was very 
tough and very rough, the kind of guy who could slam 
into a goalpost wearing a football helmet and break the 
post rather than his head. He didn’t take any back talk 
from anyone, least of all from kids who came from 
privileged backgrounds. If you stepped out of line, 
Dobias smacked you and he smacked you hard. Very 
quickly 1 realized that I wasn’t going to make it with 
this guy by trying to take him on physically, A few 
less fortunate kids chose that route, and they ended up 
getting stomped. Most of my classmates took the 
opposite approach and became nebbishes. They never 
challenged Dobias about anything. 

I took a third route, which was to use my head to 
get around the guy. I figured out what it would take to 
get Dobias on ray side. In a way, I finessed him. It 
helped that I was a good athlete, since he was the 
baseball coach and I was the captain of the team. But I 
also learned how to play him. 

What I did, basically, was to convey that I respected 
his authority, but that he didn’t intimidate me. It was a 
delicate balance. Like so many strong guys, Dobias 
had a tendency to go for the jugular if be smelled 
weakness. On the other hand, if he sensed strength but 



74 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Crowing Up * 75 


you didn’t try to undermine him, he treated you like a 
man. From the time I figured that out — and it was 
more an instinct than a conscious thought — we got 
along great. 

I was a good enough student at the academy, al- 
though I can’t say I ever worked very hard, I was 
lucky that it came relatively easily to me, because I 
was never all that interested in schoolwork. I under- 
stood early on that the whole academic thing was only 
a preliminary to the main event — which was going to 
be whatever I did after I graduated from college. 

Almost from the time 1 could walk. I’d been going 
to construction sites with my father, Robert and 1 
would tag along and spend our time hunting for empty 
soda bottles, which we’d take to the store for deposit 
money. As a teenager, when I came home from school 
for vacation, I followed my father around to learn 
about the business close up— dealing with contractors 
or visiting buildings or negotiating for a new site. 

You made it in my father’s business — rent-controlled 
and rent-stabilized buildings — by being very tough and 
very relentless. To turn a profit, you had to keep your 
costs down, and my father was always very price- 
conscious. He’d negotiate just as hard with a supplier 
of mops and floor wax as he would with the general 
contractor for the larger items on a project. One 
advantage my father had was that he knew what 
everything cost. No one could put anything over on 
him. If you know, for example, that a plumbing job is 
going to cost the contractor $400,000, then you know 
how far you can push the guy. You’re not going to try 


to negotiate him down to $300,000, because that’s just 
going to put him out of business. But you’re also not 
going to let him talk you into $600,000. 

The other way my father got contractors to work for 
a good price was by selling them on his reliability. 
He’d offer a low price for a job, but then he’d say, 
“Look, with me you get paid, and you get paid on 
time, and with someone else, who knows if you ever 
see your money?” He’d also point out that with him 
they’d get in and out quickly and on to the next job. 
And finally, because he was always building, he could 
hold out the promise of plenty of future work. His 
arguments were usually compelling. 

My father was also an unbelievably demanding 
taskmaster. Every morning at six, he’d be there at the 
site and he would just pound and pound and pound. 
He was almost a one-man show. If a guy wasn’t doing 
his job the way my father thought it should be done— 
and I mean any job, because he could do them 
all — he’d jump in and take over. 

It was always amusing to watch a certain scenario 
repeat itself. My father would start a building in, say, 
Flatbush, at the same time that two competitors began 
putting up their own buildings nearby. Invariably, my 
father would finish his building three or four months 
before his competitors did. His building would also 
always be a little better-looking than the otiher two, 
with a nicer, more spacious lobby and larger rooms in 
die apartments themselves. He’d rent them out quick- 
ly, at a time when it wasn’t so easy to rent. Eventually, 
one or both of his competitors would go bankrupt 


76 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Growing Up ■ 77 


before they’d fi nis h their buildings, and my father 
would step in and buy diem out. I saw this happen 
over and over. 

In 1949, when 1 was just three years old, my father 
began building Shore Haven Apartments, the first of 
several large apartment complexes that eventually made 
him one of the biggest landlords in New York’s outer 
boroughs. Because he built the projects so efficiently, 
my father did exceptionally well with them. At the 
time, the government was still in the business of 
financing lower- and middle-income housing. To build 
Shore Haven, for example, my father got a loan of 
$10.3 million from the Federal Housing Administration 
(FHA). The loan was based on what the agency 
projected as a fair and reasonable cost for the project, 
including a builder’s profit of 7.5 percent. 

By pushing his contractors very hard, and negotiat- 
ing hard with his suppliers, my father was able to 
bring the project in ahead of schedule and almost $1 
million under budget. The term “windfall profits” 
was actually coined to describe what my father and 
some others managed to earn through hard work and 
competence.' Eventually such profits were disallowed. 

In the meantime, however, my father put up thou- 
sands of good quality lower- and middle-income apart- 
ments of the sort that no one is building today because 
it’s not profitable and government subsidies have been 
eliminated. To this day, the Triimp buildings in Queens 
and Brooklyn are considered among the best reason- 
ably priced places to live in New York. 

After I graduated from New York Military Academy 


in 1964 I flirted briefly with the idea of attending film 
school at the University of Southern California. I was 
attracted to the glamour of the movies, and 1 admired 
guys like Sam Goldwyn, Darryl Zanuck, and most of 
all Louis B. Mayer, whom I considered great showmen. 
But in the end 1 decided real estate was a much better 
business. 

I began by attending Fordham University in the 
Bronx, mostly because I wanted to be close to home. I 
got along very well with the Jesuits who ran the 
school, but after two years, I decided that as long as I 
had to be in college, I might as well test myself 
against die best. I applied to the Wharton School of 
Finance at the University of Pennsylvania and 1 got in. 
At the time, if you were going to make a career in 
business, Wharton was the place to go. Harvard Busi- 
ness School may produce a lot of CEOs — guys who 
manage public companies — but the real entrepreneurs 
all seemed to go to Wharton: Saul Steinberg, Leonard 
Lauder, Ron Perelman — the list goes on and on. 

Perhaps the most important tiling I learned at Wharton 
was not to be overly impressed by academic creden- 
tials. It didn’t take me long to realize that there was 
nothing particularly awesome or exceptional about my 
classmates, and that I could compete with them just 
fine. The other important thing I got from Wharton 
was a Wharton degree. In my opinion, that degree 
doesn’t prove very much, but a lot of people I do 
business with take it very seriously, and it’s considered 
very prestigious. So all things considered, I’m glad I 
went to Wharton. 


78 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Crowing Up • 79 


I was also very glad to get finished, I immediately 
moved back home and went to work full-time with my 
father I continued to team a lot, but it was during this 
period that I began to think about alternatives. 

For starters, my father's scene was a little rough for 
my tastes — and by that I mean physically rough. I 
remember, for example, going around with the men 
we called tent collectors. To do this job you had to be 
physically imposing, because when it came to collecting 
rent from people who didn't want to pay, size mattered 
a lot more than brains. 

One of the first tricks I learned was that you never 
stand in front of someone’s door when you knock. 
Instead you stand by the wall and reach over to knock. 
The first time a collector explained that to me, I 
couldn’t imagine what he was talking about, “What’s 
the point?” I said. He looked at me like I was crazy. 
“The point,” he said, “is that if you stand to the side, 
the only thing exposed to danger is your hand.” 1 still 
wasn’t sure what he meant, “In this business,” he 
said, “if you knock on the wrong apartment at the 
wrong time, you’re liable to get shot.” 

My father had never sheltered me, but even so, this 
was not a world I found very attractive. I’d just 
graduated from Wharton, and suddenly here I was in a 
scene that was violent at worst and unpleasant at best. 
For example, there were tenants who’d throw then- 
garbage out the window, because it was easier than 
putting it in the incinerator. At one point, I instituted a 
program to teach people about using the incinerators. 
The vast majority of tenants were just fine, but the bad 


element required attention, and to me it just wasn’t 
worth it. 

The second thing I didn’t find appealing was that 
the profit margins were so low. You had no choice but 
to pinch pennies, and there was no room for any 
luxuries. Design was beside the point because every 
building had to be pretty much the same: four walls, 
common brick facades, and straight up. You used red 
brick, not necessarily because you liked it but because 
it was a penny a brick cheaper than tan brick. 

I still remember a time when my father visited the 
Trump Tower site, midway through construction. Our 
facade was a glass curtain wall, which is far more 
expensive than brick. In addition, we were using the 
most expensive glass you can buy— bronze solar. My 
father took one look, and he said to me, “Why don’t 
you forget about the damn glass? Give them four or 
five stories of it and then use common brick for the 
rest. Nobody is going to look up anyway.” It was a 
classic, Fred Trump standing there on 57th Street and 
Fifth Avenue trying to save a few bucks. I was 
touched, and of course I understood where he was 
coming from — but also exactly why I’d decided to 
leave. 

The real reason I wanted out of my father’s business — 
more important than the fact that it was physically 
rough and financially tough— was that I had loftier 
dreams and visions. And there was no way to imple- 
ment them building housing in the outer boroughs. 

Looking back , 1 realize now that I got some of my 
sense of showmanship front my mother. She always 


80 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


had a flair for the dramatic and the grand. She was a 
very traditional housewife! but she also had a sense of 
the world beyond her- I still remember my mother, 
who is Scottish by birth, sitting m front of the televi- 
sion set to watch Queen Elizabeth's coronation and not 
budging for an entire day. She was just enthralled by 
the pomp and circumstance, the whole idea of royalty 
and glamour. I also remember ray father that day, 
pacing around impatiently. “For Christ’s sake, Mary,” 
he’d say. “Enough is enough, turn it off. They’re all a 
bunch of con artists. ’’ My mother didn't even look up. 
They were total opposites in that sense. My mother 
loves splendor and magnificence, while my father, 
who is very down-to-earth, gets excited only by com- 
petence and efficiency. 


4 

THE 

CINCINNATI KID 


Prudence Pays 


I n college, while my friends were reading the 
comics and the sports pages of newspapers, 1 was 
reading the listings of FHA foreclosures. It might 
seem a bit abnormal to study lists of federally financed 
housing projects in foreclosure, but that's what I did. 
And that’s how I found out about Swifton Village. It 
was a job that 1 bought with my father, while I was in 
college, and it was my First big deal, 

Swifton Village was a 1,200-unit apartment devel- 
opment in Cincinnati, Ohio, and it was a very troubled 
place. There were 800 vacant apartments, the develop- 
ers had gone under, the government had foreclosed 

81 


82 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Cincinnati Kid: Prudence Pays • 83 


and the whole deal was a disaster. But from our 
perspective that was great, because it gave us a terrific 
opportunity. 

A lot of times, when you are dealing with a govern- 
ment agency on a foreclosure, they just want to get out 
of it as quickly as possible. They aren’t equipped to 
manage it. In this case, things had deteriorated so 
badly that no one else was even bidding. 

Today you’ll find the same thing if you go out to the 
Sun Belt, where they built all that housing during the 
oil boom. Now you have huge developments with 30 
and 40 percent vacancy rates. Developers are suicidal 
because banks are foreclosing on them. It’s a great 
time for a smart buyer, because you can get unbeliev- 
able deals. 

My father and I put in a very minimal bid for 
Swifton, and it was accepted. We ended up paying less 
than $6 million for a job which had cost twice that 
much to build just two years earlier. We were also 
immediately able to get a mortgage for what we paid, 
plus about $100,000, which we put toward fixing the 
place up. In other words, we got the project without 
putting down any money of our own. All we had to do 
was go and run it. And if we did even a halfway 
decent job, we could easily cover our mortgage from 
the proceeds of the rent. 

The fact that it was such a big job appealed to my 
father and to me because it meant we could focus a 
lot of energy on it without feeling we were wasting our 
time. It takes almost the same amount of energy to 


manage 50 units as it does 1,200 — except that with 
1 ,200 you have a much bigger upside. 

After we negotiated the deal, success became a 
matter of management and marketing. The challenge 
was to get the place rented, and rented to good tenants 
who would stay there. The tenants who were living in 
the project when I took over had ripped the place 
apart. Many of them had come down from the hills of 
Kentucky. They were very poor and had seven or eight 
children, almost no possessions, and no experience 
living in an apartment complex. They crammed into 
one-room and two-room apartments, and their children 
went wild. They would just destroy the apartments and 
wreak havoc on the property. 

The tenants not only didn’t care, many of them also 
didn’t see fit to pay rent. If you pressed them, they 
had a tendency to take off. What we discovered is that 
to avoid paying rent, these people would rent a trailer, 
pull it up in front of their apartments at one or two in 
the morning, and disappear into the night with all their 
belongings. That was fine by me, but I wanted to make 
sure we got paid first. Our solution was to institute a 
“trailer- watch.” We had someone on round-the-clock 
patrol. 

After we got rid of the bad tenants, we set about 
fixing the place up to attract a better element. That 
required a substantial investment, almost $800,000 by 
the time we were done, which was a lot of money in 
those days. But it was more than worth it. In New 
York the laws prevent you from getting fair increases 
even when you make improvements, but in Cincinnati 


84 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Cincinnati Kid: Prudence Pays * 85 


we were immediately able to charge and get much 
higher rents for the apartments at Swifton Village. 

The first thing we did was invest in beautiful white 
shutters for the windows. That may not sound like a 
big deal, but what the shutters did was give a bunch of 
cold red brick buildings a feeling of warmth and 
coziness t which was important. It was also much more 
expensive than you'd guess* because you're talking 
about 1,200 units, each of which has eight to ten 
windows. The next thing we did was rip out the 
cheap, horrible aluminum front doors on the apart- 
ments and put up beautiful colonial white doors. 

I made sure the whole complex was very clean and 
very well maintained. As I said earlier. I’ve always 
had a personal thing about cleanliness, but I also 
believe it's a very good investment. For example, if 
you want bo sell a car and you spend five dollars to 
wash and polish it and then apply a little extra elbow 
grease, suddenly you fmd you can charge an extra four 
hundred dollars — and get it. I can always tell a loser 
when I see someone with a car for sale that is filthy 
dirty. It’s so easy to make it look better. 

It’s no different in real estate. Well - maintained real 
estate is always going to be worth a lot more than 
poorly maintained real estate. That's been less true 
during the past few years in New York, when there’s 
been such a fever for real estate that people buy 
anything. But it’s a mistake to be lulled by good 
times. Markets always change, and as soon as there’s 
a downturn, cleanliness becomes a major value. 

We painted the hallways, we sanded and stained the 


floors, we kept the vacant apartments immaculately 
clean, and we landscaped the grounds. We also ran 
beautiful newspaper ads for the project— at a time 
when not many people in Cincinnati were advertising 
real estate. People came to check us out, and the word 
of mouth started getting good. Within a year, the 
buildings were 100 percent rented. 

Along the way we went through a half dozen differ- 
ent project managers before we found the one we 
wanted. We had managers who were honest but dumb, 
including one guy who literally painted himself into 
the comer of an apartment. Others were smart but 
didn’t know the first thing about managing. Fortunately, 
we went through them fast, because 1 tend to size 
people up pretty quickly. 

Ultimately, we got a fabulous man whom I’ll call 
Irving. Irving was sixty-five years old and a real 
character. He was one of the greatest bullshit artists 
I’ve ever met, but in addition to being a very sharp 
talker and a very slick salesman, he was also an 
amazing manager. Irving was the kind of guy who 
worked perhaps an hour a day and accomplished more 
in that hour than most managers did in twelve hours. I 
learned something from that: it’s not how many hours 
you put in, it’s what you get done while you’re 
working. 

The problem with Irving was that he wasn’t the 
most trustworthy guy in die world. 1 suspected as 
much from the first day, but it wasn’t until I tried to 
put a bond on him — something 1 do with any employ- 
ee who handles money — that my instincts were con- 


86 - TRUMP: THE ART OP TOE DEAL 


The Cincinnati Kid: Prudence Pays • 87 


finned. My insurance agent called me back after 
running a check, and he said, “Donald, you’ve got to 
be kidding about a bond. This guy is a con man.” It 
turned out that Irving had done all sorts of con jobs 
and swindles, and he’d often been in trouble with the 
law. 

My philosophy has always been that if you ever 
catch someone stealing, you have to go after him very 
hard, even if it costs you ten times more than he stole. 
Stealing is the worst. But with Irving I had a dilemma: 
he was far and away more capable than any honest 
manager I had found, and so long as he was in charge, 
no one under him would dare steal. That meant I only 
had to keep my eye on him. I used to kid Irving. I’d 
say, “We pay you $50,000 and all you can steal.” 
And he would act all upset. 

If I’d caught him in the act, I would have fired 
Irving on the spot, but I never did. Still, I figure he 
managed to steal at least another $50,000 a year. Even 
so, 1 was probably getting a bargain. 

One day I walked into the office, and one of the 
girls who worked there was crying. It turned out that 
there was something they called a funeral fund, to 
which they all contributed in order to buy flowers for 
anyone they knew who’d died, They had about $80 in 
the fund. When I asked the girl what she was crying 
about, she said, “Oh, that Irving, he stole our funeral 
fund.” 

I went to Irving and I said, “Irving, dammit, did 
you steal their money?” Of course he just denied it. 
He swore he’d get those girls, and he ranted and raved 


for half an hour. But 1 always assumed the girls were 
telling the truth. Irving was a classic. He had prob- 
lems, but he was a classic. 

I'll give you an example of how Irving worked. 
You’ve got to understand that we are talking about a 
short, fat, bald-headed guy with thick glasses and 
hands like Jell-O, who’d never lifted anything in his 
life beside a pen, and who had no physical ability 
whatsoever. What he did have, however, was an in- 
credible mouth. 

As I mentioned, in the early days we had a good 
number of tenants who didn't believe in paying rent. 
Sometimes, Wing would go out and collect himself. 
He’d ring the doorbell, and when someone came to the 
door, he’d go crazy. He’d get red in the face, use 
every filthy word he could think of, and make every 
threat in the book. It was an act, but it was very 
effective: usually they paid up right then and there. 

One day, while Irving was on his rounds, he knocked 
on a door, and a little ten-year-old girl answered, 

Irving said, ‘ ‘You go tell your father to pay his f ing 

rent or I’m going to knock his ass off." And he went 
on like that, until the girl’s mother came out to see 
what was going on. As it happened, she was an 
absolutely beautiful woman. 

Now Irving had a weakness for all women, and this 
woman was quite exceptional. So immediately, Irving 
started putting the move on her. He invited her out to 
dinner. The woman, whose husband was either a truck 
driver or a construction worker, had never experienced 
anyone like Irving and obviously didn’t know what to 



88 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


make of him. There was no way, however, that she 
was interested in Irving, and finally he gave up and we 
left. 

About an hour later, Irving and I were sitting in his 
office whert this huge guy, a monster, maybe 240 
pounds, burst through the door. He was furious that 
Irving had cursed in front of his daughter, and he was 
ready to strangle him for coming on to his wife. The 
guy had murder in his eyes. 

I expected Irving, if he had any sense, to run for his 
life. Instead, he started verbally attacking the man, 
flailing and screaming and chopping his hands in the 
air. "You get out of this office, 1 ’ he said. "FU kill 
you. I’ll destroy you. These hands are lethal weapons, 
they’re registered with the police department.” 

I'll never forget how the guy looked at Irving and 
said, "You come outside, you fat crap, I want to bum 
grass with you.” I always loved that phrase: "bum 
grass.” And I thought to myself, Irving is in serious 
trouble. But Irving didn’t seem to think so. "I’d fight 
you any time you want,” he said, "but it’s unlawful for 
me to fight.” 

All you had to do was look at Irving to know those 
hands were hardly registered weapons. But Irving was 
very much like a lion tamer. You’ve seen these guys, 
maybe 150 pounds, who walk blithely into a cage 
where there’s a magnificent 800-pound lion pacing 
around. If that animal sensed any weakness or any 
fear, he’d destroy the trainer in a second. But instead 
the trainer cracks his whip, walks with authority, and, 
amazingly, the lion listens. Which is exactly what 


The Cincinnati Kid: Prudence Riys * 89 


Irving did with this huge guy, except his whip was his 
mouth. 

The result was that the guy left die office. He was 
still in a rage, but he left. Irving probably saved his 
own life, just by showing no fear, and that left a very 
vivid impression on me. You can’t be scared. You do 
your thing, you hold your ground, you stand up tall, 
and whatever happens, happens. 

As for Swifton Village, once Irving had it running 
well, I began spending less and less time there. I 
wasn't really needed anymore in Cincinnati. So I cut 
back my visits to Swifton, first to once a week, and 
eventually to once a month. 

Early on, I’d become particularly friendly with one 
of the newer tenants at Swifton. He was Jewish, an 
older man who'd been in a concentration camp in 
Poland. He’d started off in America as a butcher, then 
bought the shop, and by the time I met him, he owned 
perhaps fourteen butcher shops. He and his wife had 
taken two apartments in Swifton and put them to- 
gether, and they had a great place, and they were very 
happy there. I had a lot of respect for this guy, because 
he had street smarts, he’d been around, and he was 
obviously a true survivor. 

One day, a number of years after we first bought the 
place, I was out visiting. I ran into my friend. “How 
are you doing, how are you feeling?” I asked. “Good, 
good,” he replied, but then he took me aside and 
whispered, “Donald, you are a friend of mine and 1 
have to tell you, sell this job.” And I said, “Why?” 

“Because it’s going real bad — not the job but the 


90 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


area. It’s being surrounded by people who are so bad 
they will cut your throat and walk away and not even 
think about it. I’m talking about people who enjoy 
cutting throats.” That was the exact expression. I 
never forgot it. 

Now, I’m someone who responds to people I have 
respect for, and I listen. Again, it's instincts, not 
marketing studies. So I spent an extra two days in 
Cincinnati, and I rode around, and I saw that there 
was trouble brewing, that neighborhoods were getting 
rough. 

1 put the job up for sale, and almost immediately we 
got an offer. We’d already done very well with Swifton 
Village, because our debt was very small relative to 
the size of the complex, and our rent roll, by the end, 
had reached about $700,000 a year. But selling was 
how we made a real lulling. 

The buyer was the Prudent Real Estate Investment 
Trust. Those were the go-go days when real estate 
investment trusts — partnerships that invested in real 
estate — were very hot. The banks were loaning money 
to any REIT. The only problem was that many of the 
people running the REITs were neither knowledgeable 
nor competent. I called them die guys with the white 
bucks. They were the sort of people who’d throw 
money into a project in Puerto Rico without even 
going to see it. Eventually they’d discover that the 
building they thought they'd bought had never even 
been built. 

In the case of Prudent, they sent a young man out to 
inspect and evaluate the property prior to making a 


The Cincinnati Kid: Prudence Pays • 91 

final decision on whether to go forward with the sale. 
This kid was about my age, but he looked like a 
teenager. Rankly, I was surprised they’d entrusted 
such a big decision to him. 

It turned out that what he wanted to do more than 
anything was go out for lunch- He’d heard about this 
restaurant in downtown Cincinnati called the Maison- 
ette, which was supposed to be one of the five best 
restaurants in the country. He really wanted to eat 
there, and when he called to say he was coming, he 
asked me to make a lunch reservation. I said fine. 

His flight came in a little late, about midday, and I 
met him, and I took him over to Swifton Village and 
showed him the job. We still had 100 percent occu- 
pancy at the tune, and he wasn’t interested in asking a 
lot of questions beyond that. He was anxious to get to 
the Maisonette. It took about half an hour to get there 
from Swifton, and we ended up spending about three 
hours over lunch, which is the opposite of the way I 
normally woric. If I’d had only one day to look over a 
big job like Swifton, I’d sure as hell skip lunch and 
spend my time learning everything I could about what 
I was thinking of buying. 

By the time we were done with lunch, it was almost 
four o’clock, and I had to take him to his plane. He 
returned to New York well fed and feeling great, and 
he strongly recommended going ahead with the pur- 
chase. He told his bosses that the area was wonderful 
and that Swifton was a great deal. They approved the 
sale. The price was $12 million — or approximately a 



92 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


$6 million profit for us. It was a huge return on a 
short-term investment. 

What happened next is that we signed a contract. 
By then, I could see the dark clouds clearly on the 
horizon. A lot of tenants had their leases coming up 
and weren’t planning to renew. We put a clause in the 
contract of sale saying that all representations con- 
tained in it were as of the signing of the contract — not 
as of the closing, which is what’s typically required. 
In other words, we were willing to represent that the 
project was 100 percent rented at the time of the 
contract signing, but we didn’t want to make the same 
promise at the time of closing, three or four months 
down the line. 

The other thing I did was to insist on a clause in the 
contract in which they guaranteed they’d close, or else 
pay a huge penalty. That was also very unusual, 
because in nearly every other deal, the buyer puts up a 
10 percent deposit, and if he fails to close, all he 
forfeits is the deposit. 

frankly, the Prudent people should have been more 
prudent. But, as I said, the REITs were hot to trot, 
and they couldn’t make deals fast enough. In the end, 
of course, it never pays to be in too much of a hurry. 
On the day we closed, there were dozens of vacant 
apartments. 


5 

THE MOVE 
TO MANHATTAN 


^Phad my eye on Manhattan from the time I gradu- 
I a ted from Wharton in 1968. But at that point, the 
^■market in the city was very hot, the prices seemed 
very high, and I was unable to find a deal I liked — 
meaning a good piece of property at a price I found 
affordable. My father had done very well for himself, 
but he didn’t believe in giving his children huge trust 
funds. When I graduated from college, I had a net 
worth of perhaps $200,000, and most of it was tied up 
in buildings in Brooklyn and Queens. So I waited. I 
went to work helping to run my father’s business, and 

93 



94 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


I continued to spend as much time as possible in 
Manhattan. 

The turning point came in 1971 , when I decided to 
rent a Manhattan apartment, tt was a studio, in a 
building on Third Avenue and 75th Street, and it 
looked out on the water tank in the court of the 
adjacent building. I jokingly referred to my apartment 
as a penthouse, because it did happen to be near the 
top floor of the building. I also tried to divide it up so 
that it would seem bigger. But no matter what I did, it 
was still a dark, dingy little apartment. Even so, I 
loved it. Moving into that apartment was probably 
more exciting for me than moving, fifteen years later, 
into the top three floors of Trump Tower on Fifth 
Avenue and 57th Street overlooking Central Park. 

You have to understand; I was a kid from Queens 
who worked in Brooklyn, and suddenly I had an 
apartment on the Upper East Side. 

The really important filing was that by virtue of this 
move 1 became much more familiar with Manhattan. I 
began to walk the streets in a way you never do if you 
just come in to visit or do business. I got to know all 
the good properties. I became a city guy instead of a 
kid from the boroughs. As far as 1 was concerned, 1 
had the best of all worlds. I was young, and I had a lot 
of energy, and l was living in Manhattan, even though 
I commuted back to Brooklyn to work. 

One of the first things I did was join Le Club, 
which at the time was the hottest club in file city and 
perhaps the most exclusive — like Studio 54 at its 
height. It was located on East 54th Street, and its 


Hie Move to Manhattan * 95 


membership included some of the most successful men 
and the most beautiful women in the world. It was the 
sort of place where you were likely to see a wealthy 
se venty- fi ve- year-old guy walk in with three blondes 
from Sweden. 

I’ll never forget how I became a member. One day I 
called up Le Club and I said, “My name is Donald 
Thimp and I’d like to join your club.” The guy on the 
other end of the phone just laughed and said, “You’ve 
got to be kidding.” Nobody, of course, had heard of 
me. The next day I got another idea, and I called back 
and I said to the guy, “Listen, could I have a list of 
your members? I may know someone who is a mem- 
ber." And he said, “I’m sony, we don’t do that,” and 
he hung up. 

The next day 1 called again and said, “I need to 
reach the president of the club. 1 want to send him 
something.” For some reason, the guy gave me the 
president’s name and his business number, and 1 called 
him up. I introduced myself. I said, veiy politely, 
“My name is Donald Thimp, and I’d like to join Le 
Club.” And he said, "Do you have any friends or 
family in the club?” and I said, “No, I don’t know 
anybody there.” 

He said, “Well, what makes you think you should 
be admitted as a member?” I just kept talking and 
talking, and finally this fellow said to me, “I’ll tell 
you what, you sound like a nice young man, and 
maybe it would be good to have some younger mem- 
bers, so why don’t you meet me for a drink at 
Twenty-one?’ ’ 


96 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Move to Manhattan * 97 


The next night we met for a drink. There was just 
one small problem. I don’t drink, and I’m not very big 
on sitting around. My host, on the other hand, liked to 
drink, and he had brought along a friend who also 
liked to drink. For the next two hours, we sat there as 
they drank and I didn’t, until finally I said, “Listen, 
fellas, can I help you get home?’’ and they said, “No, 
let's just have one more.” 

Now, I just wasn’t used to that. I have a father who 
has always been a rock, very straight and very solid. 
My father would come home every night at seven, 
have his dinner, read the newspaper, watch the news, 
and that was that. And I’m as much of a rock as my 
father. This was a totally different world. I remember 
wondering if every successful person in Manhattan 
was a big drinker. I figured it that was the case, I was 
going to have a big advantage. 

finally, about ten, these guys had enough, and I 
practically had to carry them home. Two weeks passed, 
and I never heard from the president. Finally, 1 called 
him, and he didn’t even remember who I was. So now 
1 had to go through the whole thing all over again, 
back to 21, only this time he didn’t drink as much, 
and he agreed to put me up for membership. He had 
only one misgiving. He said that because I was young 
and good-looking, and because some of the older 
members of the club were married to beautiful young 
women, he was worried that I might be tempted to try 
to steal their wives. He asked me to promise that I 
wouldn’t do that. 

I couldn’t believe what I was hearing. My mother is 


as much of a rock as my father. She is totally devoted 
to my father — they recently celebrated fifty years of 
marriage. That’s what I grew up with, and here’s this 
guy talking about stealing wives. 

Anyway, I promised. I was admitted to the club, 
and it turned out to be a great move for me, socially 
and professionally. I met a lot of beautiful young 
single women, and I went out almost every night. 
Actually, I never got involved with any of them very 
seriously. These were beautiful women, but many of 
them couldn’t carry on a normal conversation. Some 
were vain, some were crazy, some were wild, and 
many of them were phonies. For example, I quickly 
found out that 1 couldn’t take these girls back to my 
apartment, because by their standards what I had was 
a disaster, and in their world appearances were every- 
thing. When I finally did get married, I married a very 
beautiful woman, but a woman who also happens to 
be a rock, just like my mother and father. 

During that same period, I also met a lot of very 
successful, very wealthy men at Le Club. I had a good 
time when I went out at night, but I was also working. 
I was learning how the New York scene operates and I 
was meeting the sort of people with whom I’d eventu- 
ally work on deals. I also met the sort of wealthy 
people, particularly Europeans and South Americans, 
who eventually bought the most expensive apartments 
in Trump Tower and Trump Plaza. 

It was at Le Club that I first met Roy Cohn. I knew 
him by reputation and was aware of his image as a guy 
who wasn’t afraid to fight. One night I found myself 


n • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


sitting at the table next to him. We got introduced, and 
we talked for a while, and I challenged him. I like to 
test people. 1 said to him, “I don’t like lawyers, I 
think all they do is delay deals, instead of making 
deals, and every answer they give you is no, and they 
are always looking to settle instead of fights ’ He said 
he agreed with me. I liked that and so then I said, 
*Tm just not built that way. I’d rather fight than fold, 
because as soon as you fold once, you get the reputa- 
tion of being a folder.” 

1 could see Roy was intrigued, but he wasn’t sure 
what the point of it all was. Finally he said, “Is this 
just an academic conversation? 11 

I said, “No, it's not academic at all. It so happens 
that the government has just filed suit against our 
company and many others, under the civil rights act, 
saying that we discriminated against blacks in some of 
our housing developments.” I explained to him that 
Fd spent that afternoon with my father, talking to 
lawyers in a very prestigious Wall Street firm, and that 
they’d advised us to settle. That's exactly what most 
businessmen do when the government charges them 
with anything, because they just don't want bad pub- 
licity, even if they believe they can beat a phony rap. 

The idea of settling drove me crazy. The fact was 
that we did rent to blacks in our buildings. 

We wanted tenants who we could be sure would pay 
the rent, who would be neat and clean and good 
neighbors, and who met our requirement of having an 
income at least four times the rent. So I said to Roy, 
“What do you think I should do?” 


The Move to Manhattan * 99 


And he said, “My view is tell them to go to hell 
and fight the thing in court and let them prove that you 
discriminated, which seems to me very difficult to do, 
in view of the fact that you have black tenants in the 
building.” He also told me, “I don’t think you have 
any obligation to rent to tenants who would be unde- 
sirable, white or black, and the government doesn’t 
have a right to run your business.” 

That’s when I decided Roy Cohn was the right 
person to handle the case. I was nobody at the time, 
but he loved a good fight, and he took on my case. He 
went to court, and I went with him, and we fought the 
charges. In the end the government couldn’t prove its 
case, and we ended up making a minor settlement 
without admitting any guilt. Instead, we agreed to do 
some equal-opportunity advertising of vacancies for a 
period of time in the local newspaper. And that was 
the end of the suit, 

I learned a lot about Roy during that period. He was 
a great lawyer, when he wanted to be. He could go 
into a case without any notes. He had a photographic 
memory and could argue the facts from his head. 
When he was prepared, he was brilliant and almost 
unbeatable. However, he wasn’t always prepared. Even 
then, he was so brilliant that he could sometimes get 
away with it. Unfortunately, he could also be a disas- 
ter, and so I would always question Roy very closely 
before a court date. If he wasn’t prepared. I’d push for 
a postponement. 

I don’t kid myself about Roy. He was no Boy Scout. 
He once told me that he’d spent more than two thirds 



100 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Move to Manhattan • 101 


of his adult life under indictment on one charge or 
another. That amazed me. I said to him, “Roy, just 
tell me one thing. Did you really do all that stuff?' ’ He 
looked at me and smiled. “What the hell do you 
think?" he said. I never really knew. 

Whatever else you could say about Roy, he was very 
tough. Sometimes I think that next to loyalty, toughness 
was the most important thing in the world to him. For 
example, all Roy’s friends knew he was gay, and if 
you saw him socially, he was invariably with some 
very good-looking young man. But Roy never talked 
about it. He just didn’t like the image. He felt that to 
the average person, being gay was almost synonymous 
with being a wimp. That was the last thing he wanted 
to project, so he almost went overboard to avoid it. If 
the subject of gay rights came up, Roy was always the 
first one to speak out against them. 

Tough as he was, Roy always had a lot of friends, 
and I’m not embarrassed to say I was one. He was a 
truly loyal guy — it was a matter of honor with him — 
and because he was also very smart, he was a great 
guy to have on your side. You could count on him to 
go to bat for you, even if he privately disagreed with 
your view, and even if defending you wasn’t necessari- 
ly the best thing for him. He was never two-faced. 

Just compare that with all the hundreds of “respect- 
able" guys who make careers out of boasting about 
their uncompromising integrity but have absolutely no 
loyalty. They think only about what’s best for them 
and don’t think twice about stabbing a friend in the 
back if the friend becomes a problem. What I liked 


most about Roy Cohn was that he would do just the 
opposite. Roy was the sort of guy who’d be there at 
your hospital bed, long after everyone else had bailed 
out, literally standing by you to the death. 

In any case, I got to know a lot of people when I 
moved to Manhattan, and I got to know properties, but 
I still couldn’t find anything to buy at a price I liked. 
Then, suddenly, in 1973 things began to turn bad in 
Manhattan. I’d always assumed the market would cool 
off, because everything runs in cycles and real estate is 
no different. Even so, I never expected things to get as 
bad as they did. It was a co m bination of factors. First, 
the federal government announced a moratorium on 
housing subsidies, which they had been giving out by 
the bushel, particularly in the city. At the same time, 
interest rates began to rise, after being so stable for so 
many years that it was easy to forget they could move 
at all. Then, to make things worse, there was a spurt 
of inflation, particularly in construction costs, which 
seem to rise even when there’s no inflation anywhere 
else. 

But the biggest problem by far was with the city 
itself. The city’s debt was rising to levels that started 
to make everyone very nervous. For the first time you 
heard people talk about the city going bankrupt. Fear 
led to more fear. Before long New York was suffering 
from a crisis of confidence. People simply stopped 
believing in the city. 

It wasn’t an environment conducive to new real 
estate development. In the first nine months of 1973, 
the city issued permits for about 15,000 new apart- 



102 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


ments and single-family homes in the five boroughs. 
In the first nine months of 1974, the number dropped 
to 6,000. 

I worried about the future of New York City too, 
but I can’t say it kept me up nights. I’m basically an 
optimist, and frankly, I saw the city’s trouble as a 
great opportunity for me. Because 1 grew up in Queens, 

I believed, perhaps to an irrational degree, that Man- 
hattan was always going to be the best place to 
live — the center of the world. Whatever troubles the 
city might be having in the short term, there was no 
doubt in my min d that things had to turn around 
ultimately. What other city was going to take New 
York’s place? 

One of the pieces of property that had always 
fascinated me was the huge abandoned railyard along 
the Hudson River beginning at 59th Street and extending 
all the way up to 72nd Street. Every time I drove 
along the West Side Highway, I found myself dreaming 
about what could be built there. It didn’t take a genius 
to realize that one hundred acres of undeveloped 
riverfront property in Manhattan had a lot of potential. 
But it was another story to consider trying to develop 
such a huge piece of property when the city was in the 
midst of a financial crisis. 

I don’t believe that you can ever be hurt by buying a 
good location at a low price. At the time, a lot of 
neighborhoods on the West Side were considered dan- 
gerous places to live. There were welfare hotels on 
every side street, and drug dealers in every park. I 
remember the New York Times running a long series of 


The Move to Manhattan * 103 


articles about the block between Central Park West 
and Columbus Avenue at 84th Street — what a tough 
area it was. 

Even so, you didn't have to look very far to see how 
easily it could all change. Even on the tough side 
streets, like West 84th, there were magnificent old 
brownstones only a few steps away from Central Park. 
And on the avenues, especially Central Park West and 
Riverside Drive, there were beautiful old buildings 
with huge apartments and spectacular views. It was 
only a matter of time before people discovered the 
value. 

One day, in the summer of 1973, I came across a 
newspaper story about the Perm Central Railroad, 
which was in the middle of a massive bankruptcy 
filing. This particular story said that the Penn Central 
trustees had hired a company headed by a man named 
Victor Palmier! to sell off the assets of the railroad. 
Among the assets, it turned out, were those abandoned 
yards in the West Sixties, as well as more yards in the 
West Thirties, The deal Victor made with the Penn 
Central was that each time his company managed to 
find a buyer for an asset, he got a percentage of the 
sale. 

1 had never heard of Victor Palmieri, but I realized 
immediately that he was someone I wanted to lmow. I 
called his representatives and said, “Hello, my name 
is Donald Trump, and I’d like to buy the Sixtieth 
Street yards.” The simplest approach is often the most 
effective * 

I think they liked my directness and my enthusiasm. 


104 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


I hadn’t built anything yet, but what 1 did have was the 
willingness to go after things that people in a better 
position than mine wouldn’t have considered seeking. 

1 went to meet Victor, and we got on very well right 
from the start. He was a very smooth, attractive guy, 
an Italian who looked like a WASP. 1 told him how 
bad the 60th Street yards were, that the neighborhood 
was in trouble and the city was in trouble, and that I 
was probably crazy to be interested in the property at 
all. If you want to buy something, it’s obviously in 
your best interest to convince the seller that what he’s 
got isn’t worth very much. 

The second thing I told Victor was how incredibly 
hard it was going to be politically to get zoning 
approvals for such a big piece of undeveloped land. I 
pointed out that the community board would fight any 
development, and that the process of going before the 
City Planning Commission and the Board of Estimate 
would be endless. 

The third thing I did, and probably the most impor- 
tant, was to sell myself to Victor and his people, I 
couldn’t sell him on my experience or my accomplish- 
ment, so instead I sold him on my energy and my 
enthusiasm. 

Victor banks on people and he decided to take a 
shot on me. He ended up suggesting that I develop not 
only the 60th Street yards but also the yards on West 
34th Street. In truth, I probably oversold myself to 
him. I had no other choice. I was twenty-seven years 
old at the time, and I had never built anything in 
Manhattan, nor had my father. Much as Victor liked 


The Move to Manhattan * 105 


me, I don’t think he could have justified going with 
me if he hadn’t believed our company was big and 
powerful. We had no formal name for the company 
when I met Victor, so I began to call it the Trump 
Organization. Somehow the word ‘’organization” made 
it sound much bigger. Few people knew that the 
Trump Organization operated out of a couple of tiny 
offices on Avenue Z in Brooklyn. 

The other thing I promoted was our relationship 
with politicians, such as Abraham Beame, who was 
elected mayor of New York in November of 1973. My 
father did belong to the same Democratic club that 
Abe Beame came out of, and they did know each 
other. Like all developers, my father and I contributed 
money to Beame, and to other politicians. The simple 
fact is that contributing money to politicians is very 
standard and accepted for a New York City developer. 
We didn’t give any more to Beame than a lot of other 
developers did. In fact, it often seemed to me that, 
perhaps because we knew Beame personally, he al- 
most went out of his way to avoid any appearance that 
he was doing us any special favors. 

Instead I spent most of the four years when Beame 
was mayor trying to promote the West 34th Street site 
for a convention center. It was by far the best site on 
the merits, and we eventually got nearly every big- 
name New York City businessman behind us. Still, 
Beame never came out in support of the site until a 
few weeks before he left office. Nor did he ever give it 
his official approval. It was Ed Koch, newly elected in 
1978, who finally chose our site for the convention 




106 » TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL. 


center. No one, so far as I know, has ever suggested 
that Donald Trump and Ed Koch are close personal 
friends. But that’s getting well ahead of the story. 

By building a close relationship with Victor from 
the start, I was able, in effect, to work for him, rather 
than to be just another buyer. That was terrific for me. 
For example, we drew up agreements giving me an 
exclusive option to purchase the 60th Street and 30th 
Street yards — but subject to zoning, subject to approv- 
al by the court handling the Penn Central bankruptcy, 
subject to everything except my having to put up any 
money. The Penn Central even agreed to pay my 
development costs. It was remarkable in a way: the 
seller paying for the costs of the potential buyer. Still, 
you have to put it into perspective. What sounds like 
a stupid deal today was very different at a time when 
no one wanted to build anything, and the city was 
dying. 

Palmieri, in turn, helped give me credibility with 
the press. When he was asked by a reporter from 
Barrons why he chose Thump over others, he said, 
“Those properties were nothing but a black hole of 
undefmable risk. We interviewed all kinds of people 
who were interested in them, none of whom had what 
seemed like the kind of drive, backing, and imagina- 
tion that would be necessary. Until this young guy 
Trump came along. He’s almost a throwback to the 
nineteenth century as a promoter. He’s larger than 
life.’’ 

At one point, when I was hyping my plans to the 
press but in reality getting nowhere, a big New York 


The Move to Manhattan • 107 


real estate guy told one of my close friends, “Trump 
has a great line of shit, but where are the bricks and 
mortar?” 

I remember being outraged when 1 heard that, and I 
didn’t speak to this guy for more than a year. But 
looking back, I can see he was right. It could all have 
gone up in smoke. If 1 hadn’t managed to make one of 
those First projects happen, if I hadn’t finally con- 
vinced the city to choose my West 34th Street site for 
its convention center and then gone on to develop the 
Grand Hyatt, I’d probably be back in Brooklyn today, 
collecting rents. 1 had a lot riding on those first 
projects. 

On July 29, 1974, we announced that the Trump 
Organization had secured options to purchase the two 
waterfront sites from the Perm Central — West 59th 
Street to West 72nd Street, and West 34th Street to 
West 39th Street — at a cost of $62 million. With no 
money down. The story made the front page of the 
New York Times. 

My original idea was to build middle-income hous- 
ing on the sites at rents that seem ridiculously cheap 
today — $110 to $125 a room — but were considered 
moderately high at the time. I planned to seek financ- 
ing from the Mitchell-Lama program, through which 
the city provided low-interest long-term mortgages and 
tax abatements to builders. The program had been 
initiated to encourage middle-income housing. 

The month before our announcement, Victor and I 
and some of his people met with Abe Beame to sound 
him out about our development plans. Although he 



108 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Tile Move to Manhattan * 109 


was encouraging, from the moment we went public he 
refused to take any position until our plan had been 
considered by city agencies, including the City Plan- 
ning Commission, the Board of Estimate, and the 
local community boards. He was a politician, and he 
wanted to see which way the winds were blowing 
before he took a stand. 

No sooner had I announced my plans publicly than 
other bidders for the railyards suddenly came out of 
the woodwork. Starred Housing, for example, a com- 
pany we were partners with on the Starred City hous- 
ing project in Brooklyn, marie a bid of $150 million, 
contingent on Financing and city approvals and all the 
rest. On the face of it, their bid was a lot higher than 
mine. 

I’m the first to admit that I am very competitive and 
that I’ll do nearly anything within legal bounds to win. 
Sometimes, part of making a deal is denigrating your 
competition. In this case, 1 happened to genuinely 
believe that the Starred bid wasn't legitimate, that the 
company would never close the deal and would not be 
able to successfully develop the site even if the deal 
did go through. The fact is that anyone can bid 
anything, particularly when there are all sorts of con- 
tingencies. The same thing could be said about my 
bid, except that by then I’d put in enough time and 
effort to have convinced Palmieri’s people that I was 
very serious and very committed. 

In the end, 1 managed to convince Palmieri that it 
made more sense to stick with my $62 million bid than 
to take a flier on Starred. 


The irony is that less than a year after I announced 
my plans for the site — and beat my competition — the 
economic situation in New York City turned from bad 
to much worse. 

In February 1975, tire Urban Development Corpora- 
tion, the state agency that sold bonds to finance public 
housing, defaulted on more than $100 milli on of 
repayment on its bonds. 

In September 1975, Beame announced that because 
of the fiscal crisis, the city was suspending its own 
plans to finance the construction of virtually all new 
housing. 

In November 1975, the state announced that it, too, 
was suspending any financing of lower- and middle- 
income housing for the next five years — including a 
huge number of city projects that had already received 
preliminary approval. 

You couldn’t get up in the morning without running 
across some new headline about the city’s fiscal crisis. 
I can’t say that any of this made me truly fearful about 
the city’s future. Still, when it became clear that I 
wasn’t going to get any subsidies to build bousing, I 
decided to try a new tack. 

I'd always thought that tire West 34th Street site 
would be perfect for a new convention center. The 
problem was that nearly everyone else had other ideas. 
For starters, the city — with the support of many prom- 
inent local businessmen — had already spent more than 
three years studying and trying to develop another site 
by the Hudson River, at 44th Street. In the planning 
process alone, the city acknowledged, $ 1 3 million had 


110 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


been spent, but people 1 knew told me that the number 
was actually closer to $30 million. 

Then, just weeks after the city said it wouldn't 
finance any new housing. Beanie announced that the 
city was also freezing further spending on develop- 
ment of the 44th Street location. 1 immediately hired 
Samuel H. Lindenbauro, a talented attorney who spe- 
cialized in zoning, and who had been working until 
then on the 44th Sheet site. 

The other person I hired to help with the convention 
center was a highly dedicated woman named Louise 
S unshine , who had extraordinary political connec- 
tions. Louise had been the finance director for Hugh 
Carey when he ran for governor in 1974. She was also 
treasurer of the state Democratic party. At first, she 
worked for me for practically no pay. Later, she 
became an executive in our company. 

But even as I was assembling a team to promote my 
site, the city and state were hatching their own alterna- 
tive: to put the convention center in Battery Park City, 
opposite the World Trade Center in southern Manhat- 
tan. In my opinion, both sites — West 44th Street and 
Battery Park — were terrible choices. Making my case 
was another matter. I wanted to wage the battle in 
public, but I was an unknown. If I was going to attract 
attention for ray site and win support for it, I had to 
raise my profile. 

I decided to call my first news conference. Louise 
and Howard Rubenstein, a major New York public 
relations executive, helped attract support from several 
powerful people, including Manfred Ohrenstein, ma- 


The Move to Manhattan • 111 


jority leader of the state senate, and Theodore Kheel, 
the labor negotiator, who was very powerful in New 
York politics. Kheel delivered a classic line at the 
press conference. “Placing the new convention center 
in Battery Park,” he said, “is like putting a nightclub 
in a graveyard.” For our part, we put up a huge 
banner that said, “Miracle on 34th Street,” and I 
announced, before a ton of reporters, that I could build 
my convention center for $110 million — or at least 
$150 million less than the city had estimated it would 
cost to build at West 44th Street. 

Not surprisingly, that raised some eyebrows and 
even got us some attention in the press. But there was 
scarcely an approving peep from the politicians. I 
discovered, for the first time but not the last, that 
politicians don’t care too much what things cost. It’s 
not their money. 

In promoting my site, the first thing I pointed out 
wherever I went was how important it was to build a 
convention center. A lot of people were saying that the 
best solution, in light of the city’s fiscal crisis, was to 
scrap the idea altogether. 

To me, that was classic shortsightedness. For exam- 
ple, in the face of a sales drop, most companies cut 
back on their advertising budgets. But in fact, you 
need advertising the most when people aren’t buying. 
Essentially, that’s what I said about a convention 
center. Building one, I argued, was critical to reviving 
the city’s image and, ultimately, to putting its econo- 
my back on track. 

I also told anyone who would listen how great my 


U2 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Move to Manhattan * 111 


site was, and how horrible the alternatives were. I 
pointed out that at 44th Street the convention center 
would have to be built on platforms over the water, 
which would be more costly, more problematic, and 
ultimately more time-consuming. I said that the 44th 
Street site was too small, that there was no room to 
expand it, and that because it was on the water, you’d 
have to cross under the crumbling West Side Highway 
to get to it. Finally, 1 made a big deal out of the fact 
that you needed something called a nonnavigable per- 
mit to build on the 44th Street site. A nonnavigable 
permit, which I became an expert about very quickly, 
is the federal approval required to build on certain 
waterways, and getting it requires an act of Congress. 

I was just as rough on the Battery Park site, which 
was an even more ridiculous location at the absolute 
southern tip of the city. I pointed out how remote it 
was from midtown, how far from hotels and entertain- 
ment, and how inconvenient to public transportation. I 
also circulated a state study which concluded that 
building a convention center at Battery Bark would 
require major reconstruction of the West Side High- 
way leading to it, as well as toe addition of at least 
2,000 new hotel rooms. 

Most of all, I talked about what a wonderful loca- 
tion I had on West 34th Street. It was on the right side 
of the highway — toe eastern side — which meant it was 
easily accessible. It was closer to subways and buses 
than the alternative sites. I continued to make the case 
that the center could be built more cheaply on my site, 
without dispossessing any tenants. Also, because my 


site was so big, there was plenty of room for expan- 
sion in the future. When a group of graduate students 
in a class taught by City Councilman Robert Wagner 
did a little study that rated our site toe best, I managed 
to get hold of it and immediately christened it toe 
Wagner Report. Its namesake wasn’t thrilled. 

Before long, I had everything going for me except 
the support of a few absolutely key people. Abe 
Beame was at toe top of the list. Once he gave up on 
West 44to Street, Beame got behind Battery Park, and 
no matter how many great arguments I came up with 
for my site, he wouldn’t budge. Another major oppo- 
nent was John Zuocotti, a deputy mayor under Beame. 
He began going around town bad-mouthing my site. 
The reason. I’m convinced, was that he didn’t want to 
admit that he’d wasted several years of his life and 
millions of dollars of public money on a location that 
never made sense in toe first place. And that’s exactly 
what 1 said publicly. I accused him of being self- 
serving and petty and a half-dozen other things. He 
got pretty riled up. The battle received a lot of media 
attention, and ultimately, I think, it was good for my 
site. It became just another way to promote my site’s 
many advantages. 

In the end, we won by wearing everyone else down. 
We never gave up, and the opposition slowly began to 
melt away. In 1977 Beame appointed yet another 
committee to study the alternative sites, and it con- 
cluded that we did have the best site. On that basis, 
Beame finally gave us his support — although not his 


114 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Move to Manhattan • 115 


signature — just before leaving office at the end of the 
year. 

In January of 1978, Ed Koch took over as mayor 
and decided to do his own study. I figured we were 
back to square one. But things moved fast and once 
again our site came out ahead. Finally, in April 1978, 
the city and state announced that they had decided to 
purchase the 34th Street site and build the convention 
center there. It was a victory for me, but more sym- 
bolically than financially. For all the time I'd invested, 
I earned much less than I deserved — and nowhere near 
enough to justify the effort financially. 

As my deal with the Penn Central was structured, I 
was paid total compensation of about $833,000 based 
on the $12 million price for the site that the city 
negotiated with Penn Central. In the end I offered to 
forgo my fee altogether, if the city would agree to 
name the convention center after my family. I’ve been 
criticized for trying to make that trade, but 1 have no 
apologies. There wouldn’t be a new convention center 
in New York today if it hadn’t been for the Humps. 

More important, the city would have saved a fortune 
by letting me build the center, which I very much 
wanted to do. Instead, Ed Koch decided, by some 
logic I could never understand, that because I’d helped 
arrange the sale of the property, it was a conflict for 
me to be the builder as well. Eventually, I offered the 
city a deal that, frankly, was ridiculous for me. I said I 
would bring the entire job in for less than $200 
million, and that if there were any overruns. I’d pay 


for them myself. You won’t find many builders willing 
to put themselves on the line that way. 

Instead, the city mid state decided to oversee the 
job — and the result was perhaps the most horrendous 
construction delays and cost overruns in the history of 
the building business. A man named Richard Kahan 
was put in charge of the Urban Development Corpora- 
tion, and ultimately it was his job to oversee the 
convention center project. Richard Kahan is a nice 
man, but be had visions of being the next Robert 
Moses. It wasn’t clear that he had the experience or 
the talent. 

One of the fust things Kahan did was to hire I. M. 
Pei as his architect. I. M. Pei is a man with a terrific 
reputation, but in my view he often chooses the most 
expensive solution to a problem — and is virtually un- 
controllable. Immediately, Pei decided to design a 
space frame for the center — a structural system that 
any professional builder will tell you is one of the 
most difficult to build and is especially vulnerable to 
cost overruns. This is particularly true when you're 
dealing with the sort of huge space frame they needed 
for a convention center. 

From the very start, I told Kahan and his people that 
it was critical to build a parking garage simultaneously. 
How can you have a convention center without parking? 
They told me that a garage would hold up the city’s 
environmental-impact approval, “Look," I said to 
them, “those approvals are only going to be tougher 
to get later, and at the very least you should begin a 
separate filing for tile garage now,' so you can at least 


1U • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


start the process.” They ignored me, and now they 
have no parking, and no prospect of building any in 
the near future. 

The choice of where to put the entrance was equally 
ill-considered. If you put the entrance at the west, the 
whole center faces the Hudson River, which is a 
beautiful view. Instead, they built the entrance on the 
eastern side of the building — facing the traffic on 
Eleventh Avenue. 

As I watched all these mi stakes being made, I 
became very angry and frustrated. In 1983, when it 
was clear the construction of the convention center 
was already a disaster of delays and ovemms, I wrote 
a letter to William Stem, who by then had replaced 
Richard Kahan as president of die Urban Development 
Corporation. For a second time I offered, this time for 
no fee at all, to oversee the project and to assure that it 
would get completed quickly and without further cost 
overruns. 

My offer was refused — and a disaster eventually 
turned into a catastrophe. By the time the convention 
center was finally finished last year, it was four years 
behind schedule — and at least $250 million over bud- 
get. When you add interest — the carrying costs for all 
those years of construction — the total cost was proba- 
bly $1 billion, or $700 mill ion over budget. 

The construction was a terrible disgrace, and all the 
worse because no one raised a fuss about it. When I 
was invited to attend opening-day ceremonies in 1986, 
I refused. What happened at the convention center is 
that the city and state took a great piece of property 


The Move to Manhattan * 117 


and a great project and ruined it through terrible 
planning and ridiculous cost overruns. Even if the 
convention center is ultimately a success, it can never 
earn back all the money that was unnecessarily 
squandered to build it. 

The tunny thing about devoting so much time and 
energy to die 34th Street site is that I never con- 
sidered it anything to compare with the 60th Street 
yards. The problem was that developing 60th Street 
proved even more difficult than promoting 34th 
Street, The community opposition was stronger, the 
zoning was more complicated, and the banks were 
highly reluctant to finance a huge residential housing 
project in a city still teetering on the verge of 
bankruptcy. 

In 1979 I reluctantly let my option on the 60th 
Street yards expire so that I could concentrate on other 
deals that seemed more immediately promising. 

The first one, fittingly, was with Palmieri and the 
Penn Central — for the purchase of the Commodore 
Hotel. 


6 

GRAND HOTEL 


Reviving 42nd Street 


D uring the period when I was trying to make 
something happen with the two West Side 
yards, I got more and more friendly with 
Victor Palmieri and his people. One day, late in 1974, 
1 was in Victor's office, and 1 sad to him, hajf- 
jokingly, “Listen, now that I’ve got the options on the 
two yards, what other properties does the Penn Central 
own that I can buy for nothing?" 

“As a matter of fact,” said Victor, “we have some 
hotels you might be interested in." 

It so happened that the Peon Central owned several 
old hotels within a few blocks of each other in mid- 

119 




120 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street - 121 


town: the Btitmore, the Barclay, the Roosevelt, and the 
Commodore. The first three were at least moderately 
successful, which meant buying them was likely to 
cost more money than I wanted to spend. The only 
one in real trouble was the Commodore, which had 
been losing money and defaulting on its property taxes 
for years. 

As it turned out, that was die best news Victor 
could have given me. I decided very quickly that the 
Commodore, in the heart of New York at 42nd Street 
and Park Avenue, next to Grand Central Station, had 
potentially the best location of any of the four hotels. 

I still remember walking over to look at the Com- 
modore the day Victor first mentioned it to me. The 
hotel and the surrounding neighborhood were unbeliev- 
ably run-down. Half the buildings were already in 
foreclosure. The brick facade of the Commodore was 
absolutely filthy, and the lobby was so dingy it looked 
like a welfare hotel. There was one of those sleazy flea 
markets operating on the ground floor with a bunch of 
boarded-up storefronts on either side and derelicts 
lying in the doorways. To most people, it would have 
been a very depressing scene. 

But as I approached the hotel, something completely 
different caught my eye. It was about nine in the 
morning, and there were thousands of well-dressed 
Connecticut and Westchester commuters flooding onto 
the streets from Grand Central Terminal and the sub- 
way stations below. The city was on the verge of 
bankruptcy, but what I saw was a superb location. 
Unless the city literally died, millions of affluent 


people were going to keep passing by this location 
every day. The problem was the hotel, not the neigh- 
borhood. If I could transform the Commodore, I was 
sure it could be a hit. Convenience alone would assure 
that. 

I went back and told Victor I was interested in 
making a deal for the Commodore. He was pleased, 
because everyone else considered it a loser. I also 
went to my father and told him 1 had a chance to make 
a deal for this huge midtown hotel. At first, he refused 
to believe I was serious. Later, he told a reporter that 
his initial reaction to my idea was that “buying the 
Commodore at a time when even the Chrysler Build- 
ing is in receivership is like fighting for a seat on the 
Titanic." 

I wasn’t naive. I saw potential, but I also recognized 
a downside. 1 could envision a huge home run, but I 
also knew that failing could bury me. Prom the very 
first day I went to work on the deal, 1 tried to keep my 
risk to an absolute minimum, and financially, I 
succeeded. But as the months went by, the deal be- 
came more and more complicated and difficult. I kept 
investing more time and more energy, and the stakes 
rose for reasons unrelated to money. I could talk big 
for only so long. Eventually I had to prove — to the 
real estate community, to the press, to my father — that 
I could deliver the goods. 

The Commodore deal was basically a juggling act, 
but a much trickier one than 1 originally imagined. 
First, I had to keep Palmieri’s people believing I was 
their best bet to buy the hotel, while trying to avoid. 


r 


122 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


for as long as I could, putting down any cash. At the 
same time, I had to convince an experienced hotel 
operator to come in with me before I actually had a 
deal, knowing that such a partner would give me more 
credibility with the banks when I went to seek financ- 
ing. And even a great partner wasn’t enough, I also 
had to try to persuade city officials that it was in their 
interest to give me a totally unprecedented tax break. 
That savings, I knew, would make it far easier to 
prove to the banks that the numbers for my hotel made 
sense— at a time when they were loathe to lend money 
even for projects in good neighborhoods. 

The funny thing is that the city’s desperate circum- 
stances became my biggest weapon. With Palmieri, I 
could argue that I was the only developer around who 
would even consider buying a loser hotel in a decaying 
neighborhood in a dying city. With the banks, I could 
point to their moral obligation to finance new develop- 
ments as a way to help get the city back on- its feet. 
And with city officials, I could legitimately argue that 
in return for a huge tax abatement, Td be able to create 
thousands of new construction and service jobs, help 
save a neighborhood, and ultimately share with the 
city any profits the hotel earned. 

In the late fall of 1974, I began talking seriously 
with Palmier! about a deal. Eight or nine months 
before, the Penn Central had invested $2 million on a 
renovation of the Commodore that was the equivalent 
of applying a coat of wax to a car that’s just been in a 
major accident. Even after the renovation, the Penn 
Central was projecting a huge loss for 1974, and that 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street * 123 

didn’t even include the $6 million that the hotel 
already owed in back taxes. The Commodore was a 
terrible cash drain on a bankrupt company. 

In a short time we came up with a basic structure 
for a deal. In simple terms, I would take an option to 
purchase the hotel at a price of $10 million, subject to 
my being able to get tax abatement, financing, and a 
hotel company partner — subject, in other words, to my 
putting the entire deal together before I made the 
purchase. In the meantime, I would put down a 
nonrefundable $250,000 for an exclusive option. There 
was just one problem: I wasn’t too eager to fork over 
even $250,000 on a deal that was still very much a 
long shot. In 1974, $250,000 was a huge sum of 
money for me. So I stalled. Contracts were drawn up, 
but I had my lawyers find plenty of little legal points 
to argue back and forth over. In the meantime, I went 
to work to try to put the rest of the deal together. 

What I needed first, I decided, was a really fantastic 
desigiK-one that would get people excited. I set up a 
meeting with a young, talented architect named Der 
Scutt. We met at Maxwell’s Plum on a Friday night, 
and right away I liked Der’s enthusiasm. When I told 
him what I had in mind, he immediately started 
making sketches on one of the menus. 

The key thing, I told Der, was to create something 
that looked absolutely brand-new. I was convinced that 
half the reason the Commodore was dying was be- 
cause it looked so gloomy and dark and dingy. My 
idea, from the beginning, was to build a new skin 
directly over the brick— bronze, if it could be done 


124 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street * 125 


economically, or glass. I wanted a sleek, contempo- 
rary look, something with sparkle and excitement that 
would make people stop and take notice. And it was 
obvious to me that Der understood what 1 had in mind. 

After we ate, I took Der and another Mend back to 
my apartment, the tiny studio I was still living in on 
Third Avenue, and I asked him what he thought about 
my furniture. Some people would just have said, 
“Fantastic, great,” but Der didn’t do that. “There’s 
too much of it," he said, and he started moving 
furniture around, and even pushed several pieces out 
into die hallway. When he finished, he’d managed to 
make the apartment look much bigger, which I lilted. 

I hired Der and paid him to come up with sketches 
that we could use in our presentations to the city and 
to banks. I also told him to make it appear that we’d 
spent a huge sum on the drawings. A good-looking 
presentation goes a long way. 

By the spring of 1975, we were pretty far along on 
a design. Then, one evening in the middle of April, 
Der called to tell me that he’d been fired from the 
architectural firm he worked for, Kahn & Jacobs/ 
Hellmuth, Obata & Kassabaum. I knew he hadn’t 
been getting along with his bosses. At the same time, I 
didn’t want to hold up the project. I needed the 
resources and the prestige of a big firm to do a job this 
size, and I figured it was going to be a while before 
Der made a new association. But he formed an associ- 
ation very quickly with a firm named Gruzen & 
Partners, and I was able to use the situation to my 
advantage. The Obata group desperately wanted to 


keep the job, and so, of course, did Der. The competi- 
tion gave me an opportunity to negotiate a lower 
architectural fee, which I did. In the end 1 went with 
Der, and paid him a very modest fee. ] also told him 
that doing this job would pay off big in the end. “This 
is going to be a monumental project,” I said. “It's 
going to make you into a star.” Der wasn’t thrilled 
about his fee, but later he admitted that I’d been right 
about the impact that doing the Hyatt — and subsequently 
TVump Tower — had on his career. 

During this same period, early 1975, I began to 
look for an operator for die hotel. The truth was that I 
knew nothing about the hotel business. I’ve learned a 
lot since then, and today I operate my own hotels. But 
at the time, I was only twenty-seven years old, and I’d 
hardly even slept in a hotel. Nonetheless, I was trying 
to buy this monster building, 1,500,000 square feet, 
and proposing to create a 1 ,400-room hotel — the larg- 
est since the construction of the New York Hilton 
twenty-five years earlier. It seemed clear that I needed 
an experienced operator, I also figured it probably had 
to be one of die large chains, and I wasn’t totally 
wrong. The chains may not be very exciting, but they 
do give you access to a national reservations system, 
good referral business, and basic management expertise. 

From the start, Hyatt was at the top of my list. 
Hilton seemed a little backward and old, Sheraton 
didn’t excite me for much the same reasons, and 
Holiday Inns and Rarnada Inn didn’t have enough 
class. I liked file Hyatt image. Their hotels had a 
modem look, light and clean and a little glossy, and 


126 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Grand Horel: Reviving 42nd Street * 127 


that was what I had in mind architecturally for die 
Commodore. In addition, Hyatt was very strong on 
conventions, which I thought could be a big business 
for a hotel in the Grand Central area. 

I also liked Hyatt because I thought I might have 
more leverage with them in making a deal. Chains like 
Hilton and Sheraton already had hotels in New York 
City, and they weren’t necessarily hungry to build new 
ones, particularly with the city in the dumps. Hyatt, 
on the other hand, was very successful in other cities 
but still had no flagship presence in New York City, 
and I’d heard they wanted one very badly. 

In late 1974 I called up the president of Hyatt, a guy 
named Hugo M. Friend, Jr., and we arranged to meet. 

I wasn’t terribly impressed with Skip Friend, but it 
turned out that I was right about Hyatt’s desire for a 
New York flagship, and we began to discuss a partner- 
ship on the Commodore. Fairly rapidly, I made a 
tentative deal with him, full of contingencies. I was 
very happy and very proud of myself. Then two days 
later I got a call and Skip said, “No, I’m sorry, we 
can’t do the deal that way." This became a pattern. 
We’d negotiate new terms, shake hands, a few days 
would go by, and the deal would suddenly be off 
again. Finally, a guy I’d become friendly with at 
Hyatt, a high-level executive, called, “I’d like to 
make a suggestion,” he said. “I think you should call 
Jay Pritzker and deal with him directly.” 

I’d barely heard of Pritzker, which tells you some- 
thing about how young I was at thee time. I knew, 
vaguely, that the Pritzker family owned a controlling 


interest in Hyatt, but that was about all. My Hyatt 
friend explained that Pritzker was the guy who really 
ran the company. Suddenly it dawned on me why my 
deals kept coining apart: if you’re going to make a 
deal of any significance, you have to go to the top. 

It comes down to the fact that everyone underneath 
the top guy in a company is just an employee. An 
employee isn’t going to fight for your deal. He’s 
fighting for his salary increase, or his Christmas bo- 
nus, and the last thing he wants to do is upset his boss. 
So he’ll present your case with no real opinion. To 
you, he might be very enthusiastic, but to his boss 
he’ll say, “Listen, a guy named Trump from New 
York wants to make such and such a deal, and here are 
the pros and cons, and what do you want to do?’ ’ If it 
turns out his boss likes the idea, he’ll keep supporting 
you. But if the boss doesn’t like it, the employee will 
say, “Yes, I agree, but I wanted to present it to you." 

By now it was the early spring of 1975, and I called 
Jay Pritzker, and he seemed happy to hear from me. 
Hyatt was based in Chicago, but Pritzker told me he 
was coming to New York the next week, and we 
should meet- Could I pick him up at the airport? I 
didn’t go around in limousines at the time, so I picked 
him up in my own car. Unfortunately it was a very hot 
day, and it was extremely uncomfortable in the car. If 
it bothered Jay, though, he didn't show it. I realized 
right then that Jay is very focused when it comes to 
business. He can be fun-loving when he’s relaxed, but 
mostly he’s tough and sharp, and he plays very close 
to the vest. Fortunately I had no problem with that, so 


128 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


we got along pretty well. The other thing about Jay is 
that he doesn’t much trust people in business, which is 
the way I tend to be. We were wary of each other, but 
I think there was also a mutual respect from the start. 

We managed to make a deal in a short time. We 
agreed to be equal partners. I’d build the hotel and 
Hyatt would manage it once it was built. More impor 
tant than coming to a tentative agreement was the fact 
that horn then on I was able to deal directly with Jay 
when difficulties arose. To this day, though we’ve had 
our disagreements, the partnership is strong because 
Jay and I can talk straight to one another. 

On May 4, 1975, we called a joint press conference 
and announced that we’d agreed, as partners, to pur- 
chase, gut, and fully renovate the Commodore — assuming 
we could get financing and tax abatement. The an- 
nouncement of the partnership with Hyatt, coupled 
with Der’s preliminary drawings and rough construction- 
cost estimates, finally gave me some ammunition to 
bring to the banks. By then I had hired Henry Pearce, 
a real estate broker with a special expertise in financ- 
ing. Together, we went calling. 

Henry Pearce was the head of a firm called Pearce, 
Mayer, and Greer, and he was a fantastic guy. He was 
in his late sixties, but he had more energy than most 
twenty-year-olds, and he was unrelenting in his quest 
for financing for this job. His persistence helped, and 
so did his age. We’d go in together to see these very 
conservative bankers, most of whom had never heard 
of Donald Trump. In many ways I was much more 
conservative than Henry, but it reassured these bankers 


Croud Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street ■ 129 


to see me alongside this white-haired guy with whom 
they’d been dealing forever. 

Our pitch was very much die one I mark* when I 
first met Victor Palmicn. I would talk about the great 
Thtmp Organization and all we had done, I would 
push very hard the fact that we built on time and on 
budget, because I knew that the banks were scared to 
death of cost overruns, which can kill even a good 
loan. We would show these bankers drawings and 
scale models of this huge gleaming new hotel I planned 
to build. We would talk about how the job was going 
to tum the neighborhood around, how it would create 
thousands of jobs. We would go on and on about the 
fantastic, incomparable Hyatt Company, and we’d even 
mention the great tax abatement we hoped to get from 
the city. This last point would usually stir some inter- 
est, but unfortunately we were in something of a 
Catch-22. Until we had our financing in place, the 
city wasn’t interested in seriously discussing tax 
abatement. And without tax abatement, the banks 
weren’t very interested in talking about financing. 

Eventually we decided to take a new tack. Realizing 
that the positive approach wasn’t working, we tried to 
play to their guilt and their fear and their sense of 
moral obligation. Foiget us, we’d say; you owe it to 
New York. The city is in trouble, but it’s still a great 
city, and it’s our city, and if you don’t believe in it, if 
you won’t invest in it, how can you expect it to turn 
around? If you lend millions of dollars to Third World 
countries and suburban-shopping-mall magnates, don’t 
you also owe some obligation to your own city? 



130 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street • 131 


Nothing seemed to work. On one occasion, we 
found a bank that seemed ready to say yes. Then, at 
the last moment, the guy in charge raised some trivial 
technical issue that just killed the whole deal. This guy 
was what I call an institutional man, the type who has 
virtually no emotion. To him it’s purely a job, and all 
he wants to do is go home at five and forget about it. 
You’re better off dealing with a total killer with teal 
passion. When he says no, sometimes you can talk 
him out of it. You rant and you rave, and he rants and 
raves back, and you end up making a deal. But when a 
ma chine says no, it’s very tough. We gave this guy 
every argument in die world, and after listening, he 
didn’t flinch and he didn’t move. He just said very 
slowly and steadfastly, “The answer is no, Donald. 
No. No. No." After that experience, 1 remember 
saying to Henry, “Let’s just take this deal and shove 
it." But Henry refused to give up. He and Jerry 
Schrager, my lawyer, kept me going, and we contin- 
ued to push. 

It was increasingly clear that the only way I was 
going to get financing was if the city gave me tax 
abatement. My hope rested in a program called the 
Business Investment Incentive Policy, which the city 
adopted in early 1975. It was designed, in a bad 
market, to encourage commercial development by pro- 
viding tax abatements to developers. In the middle of 
1975, I decided to approach the city, even though I 
hadn’t found financing. To most people, that would 
have been ridiculous. I took it one step further. I went 
in and asked for the world — for an unprecedented tax 


abatement — on the assumption that even if I got cut 
back, the break might still be suflrcient. In a funny 
way, it was like a high stakes poker game in which 
neither side has very strong cards so both are forced to 
bluff. By this point, I almost couldn’t afford to walk 
away from the deal if I wanted to main tain any 
credibility. The city, meanwhile, was more desperate 
than ever to encourage development. 

I first made my case to the city in October 1975, 
and it was direct. The Commodore was losing money 
and deteriorating fast. The Grand Central neighbor- 
hood was turning into a slum. The Hyatt hotel chain 
was ready to come to New York, but there was no way 
we could afford to put up millions to build a new hotel 
unless the city gave me some relief on property taxes. 

The city’s economic development people agreed to 
structure a program in which we’d effectively be 
partners. The city would give me a total abatement of 
property taxes for forty years. In return, I would pay 
the city a yearly fee, and a share of any profits the 
hotel made. The mechanism was fairly complirated 
Hirst, I would buy the Commodore from the Penn 
Central for $10 million, $6 mill ion of which would 
immediately go to the city to pay off the back taxes. 
Then I would sell the hotel to die city for one dollar 
and they would lease it back to me for ninety- nine 
years. My rent, paid in lieu of all property taxes, 
would begin at $250,000 a year and rise by the 
fortieth year to $2.7 million. Also, I would pay the 
city a percentage of the profits. At the end. I’d be 
paying the equivalent of full property taxes based on 



132 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


the hotel’s assessed value as of the time we were 
matring our deal. 

The whole arrangement was subject to approval by 
the city’s Board of Estimate, which met to consider it 
for the first time in late December 1975. A week 
before the meeting, I went to Victor Palmieri and 
explained that if he wanted die city to take our 
abatement seriously, we had better make it clear that 
die Commodore was in deep trouble and that it might 
not survive much longer. He agreed with me. On 
December 12, Palmieri announced that the Penn Cen- 
tral had lost another $1.2 milli on on the Commodore 
during 1975, was anticipating worse losses for 1976, 
and as a result intended to close the hotel permanently 
no later than June 30, 1976. 

Two days later, there was another significant an- 
nouncement, which I hadn’t anticipated. Portman As- 
sociates, a company that had spent the past two years 
trying to get financing for a huge new hotel across 
town in Times Square, revealed that it was scrapping 
the project because it had been unable to get bank 
support. In a way, that was bad for me, because I 
needed all the evidence 1 could get that investing in 
New York made sense. On the other hand, in dealing 
with the city, I could point to the Portman fiasco as 
clear proof that the only chance I had to get financing 
was if they gave me my tax abatement. 

Early in 1976, the Board of Estimate decided to 
switch the structure of die tax-abatement program. 
Instead of my selling the hotel to the city and then 
leasing it back, 1 would do the whole deal through the 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street • 133 


state’s Urban Development Corporation. The reasons 
were technical, but actually the change was advanta- 
geous to me. Unlike the city, the UDC has the power 
of condemnation, meaning the statutory right to evict 
quickly and efficiently — something that a private de- 
veloper can spend months or even years trying to do. 

By April, however, the Board of Estimate still 
hadn’t considered my tax abatement, and opposition to 
it had begun to intensify. The loudest chorus came 
from other hotel owners. Albert Formicola, head of 
the city’s Hotel Association, argued that the tax 
abatement would give me an unfair advantage compet- 
ing against the other hotel owners in the city who paid 
full property taxes. The head of the Hilton, Alphonse 
Salamone, said be could understand a ten-year tax 
abatement, but that everyone ought to compete as 
equals after that. Even Harry Helmsley, who was more 
successful and less envious than most of my competi- 
tors, said be thought the deal was a little excessive. 
Just before the Board of Estimate vote, three city 
councilmen held a news conference in front of the 
Commodore to denounce the deal. I didn’t take it 
personally. They were politicians. They sensed an 
issue that might play with the voters and the press, so 
they jumped on foe bandwagon. 

1 worried about the growing opposition,, but publicly 
my posture was to take the offensive and concede 
nothing to my critics. When a reporter later asked me 
why I got a forty-year tax abatement, I answered, 
"Because I didn’t ask for fifty.” 

The basic case against us was that the city was 


134 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


giving me too rich a deal. The length of the tax 
abatement was only part of it. In addition, critics said, 
there shouldn’t be a cap on the profits I shared with 
the city. Also, if my maximum rent was going to be 
equivalent to the full property-tax assessment as of 
1974, then that number should at least be adjustable, 
so that it could take into account the possibility that 
real estate values — and assessments — might rise over 
the years. 

If I’d been the city official in charge of negotiating 
with me, I might have ma de those same arguments. 
But while other hotel owners were great at carping, 
not one of them made an alternative offer for the 
Commodore. Admittedly, most everyone assumed I 
had an exclusive option on the property — and it helped 
that the city didn’t dispute that. Several months earli- 
er, a city official had requested that I send along a 
copy of my option agreement with the Penn Central. I 
did — but it was signed only by me, and not the 
railroad, because I had yet to put down my $250,000. 
No one even noticed that until almost two years later, 
when a reporter doing a story on the deal called the 
city and asked to see the original agreement. 

TWo weeks before the Board of Estimate was sched- 
uled for the third time to vote on my plan, an alterna- 
tive offer finally was made for the Commodore. It came 
from a company that owned a bunch of low-rent hotels 
in bad neighborhoods. If the city could get title to the 
Commodore, these people said, they’d be willing to 
buy it, put up a couple of million dollars toward a 
renovation, share all profits with the city, and forgo a 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street • 135 


cap. Because it was a half-baked offer from a ques- 
tionable group, 1 think it actually helped my case. The 
last thing the Commodore needed was a second-rate 
renovation by a third-rate hotel operator. 

The clincher, I’m convinced, came from Palmieri 
and Penn Central. The one thing that nobody wanted 
was to see the Commodore shut down and boarded up. 
On May 12, Palmieri announced that the Penn Central 
was going to dose the Commodore permanently in six 
days — exactly one day before the Board of Estimate 
bad scheduled, for the fourth time, a vote on my tax 
abatement. Immediately, the critics called the announce- 
ment a pressure tactic. I can’t say I was unhappy about 
the timing, but the fact was that the Penn Central had 
revealed six months earlier its plans to dose the hotel 
by summer. In the meantime, occupancy had dropped 
from 46 percent the previous year to 33 percent. 
Moreover, losses for the full year of operation in 1976 
were projected at $4.6 million. 

On May 19, all the local papers carried front-page 
stories about the last tenants moving out of the Com- 
modore, the hundreds of employees who were now 
looking for work, and the dread that local sbopowners 
were feeling in anticipation of a boarded- up hotel. The 
stories certainly didn’t hurt me. On May 20, the Board 
of Estimate voted unanimously — 8 to 0 — to give me 
the full tax-abatement program I’d sought. Over the 
course of the forty years, that abatement will save me 
tens of milli ons of dollars. The battle was more than 
worth it. 

Whatever my critics may have felt, a New York 


136 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE PEAL 


Times editorial ten days later made my case better than 
I could have. “The alternative,” said the editorial, “is 
the Commodore hoarded up and in tax arrears. Beyond 
the tax loss, this would be a visual wound and a 
serious depressant for one of the city's prime areas ” 

But incredibly, getting the tax abatement still didn't 
convince the banks we had a viable enterprise. When 
you look back, it seems almost hard to believe that the 
banks could doubt our numbers. What it shows you is 
how bad things were. In 1974, the Commodore was 
charging an average of $20.80 a night for a room, and 
as long as occupancy remained above 40 percent, the 
hotel nearly broke even. In our entirely new hotel, we 
projected charging an average of $48 a night for our 
rooms, with an average occupancy rate of 60 percent. 
Those were hardly great numbers, but the banks insisted 
we were being coo optimistic. As it turned out, by the 
time we opened our doors in September 1980, the city 
had turned around, and we were able to charge $1 15 
for a single room, with an average occupancy of more 
than 80 percent. By July 1987, we'd raised the room 
rate to $175, and now we average almost 90 percent 
occupancy. 

In the end, we got our financing from two institu- 
tions. The first was Equitable Life Assurance Society, 
which, in addition to its other businesses, owns a lot 
of real estate. George Peacock, the head of Equitable 
Real Estate, agreed to put up $35 million for the 
Grand Hyatt, primarily because he and his people 
thought it would be good for the city. The other 
institution was the Bowery Savings Bank, which 


Grand Hotel; Reviving 42nd Street * 137 


happened to have its headquarters right across the 
street from the Commodore and agreed to lend $45 
million. Their motivation was practical: they didn't 
want to see their own neighborhood go to hell. 

I could have saved millions and millions of dollars 
just by refurbishing the old Commodore rather than 
creating a brand-new building- Indeed, almost every- 
one fought against my spending the extra money on a 
major renovation. From the day we went public with 
our plans to cover the Commodore's brick facade with 
an entirely new curtain wall of highly reflective glass, 
critics and preservationists were furious. They were 
outraged that 1 wasn't making some attempt to fit in 
with the architecture in the rest of die neighborhood- — 
the classical look of Grand Central Station and the 
ornamented limestone-and-brick office buildings up 
and down the block. 

In my view, staying with that look would have been 
suicide. I said to these critics, “Hey, fellas, do me a 
favor and don't tell me about these great monuments, 
because the Chrysler Building is in foreclosure, the 
neighborhood is a disaster, and it's obvious some- 
thing's not working. If you think I'm going to leave 
the facade of the old Commodore the way it is, you're 
crazy. There's no way.” 

It's strange how things can turn around. Many of 
the saute critics and preservationists who hated the 
original concept of my building now love it. What 
they discovered is that by choosing this highly reflec- 
tive glass. I've created four walls of mirrors. Now 
when you go across 42nd Street or go over the 


138 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Park Avenue ramp and look up at the Grand Hyatt, 
you see the reflection of Grand Central Terminal, the 
Chrysler Building, and all the other landmarks, which 
otherwise you might not have noticed at all. 

The other new element that had a dramatic effect 
was the lobby. Most hotel lobbies in New Yoik are 
dull and unexciting. I was determined to make ours an 
event, a place people wanted to visit. We chose a 
luxurious brown paradisio marble for the floors. We 
used beautiful brass for the railing and columns. We 
built a 170-foot glass-enclosed restaurant pitched out 
over 42nd Street, which no one had ever done before. 
I’m convinced that if I’d left the Commodore the way 
it was — old and dull and nondescript — it would have 
had absolutely no impact, and it wouldn’t be doing die 
business it is doing today. 

The Grand Hyatt opened in September 1980, and it 
was a hit from the first day. Gross operating profits 
now exceed $30 million a year. Hyatt’s job was to 
manage the hotel, so my role was essentially over. But 
the fact is I still had a SO percent interest, and I’m not 
exactly the hands-off type. That caused some problems 
at the start. I would send over one of my executives, 
or more often my wife, just to see how things were 
going, and Hyatt wasn’t happy about that. One day I 
got a call from the head of all the Hyatt Hotels, 
Patrick Foley, and be said, “Donald, we have a 
problem. The manager of the hotel is going nuts, 
because your wife comes by, and she’U see dust in the 
comer of the lobby and call over a porter to clean it 
up. Or she’ll see a doorman in a uniform that’s not 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street * 139 


pressed, and she’U tell him to get it cleaned. Un- 
fortunately, my manager happens to be a guy who has 
a problem with women to start off with. But in his 
defense, he’s running a hotel with 1 ,500 employees, 
and there’s got to be a chain of command or else a 
business like this just doesn’t work.” 

So I said to Pat, “I understand what you’re saying, 
and I agree with you that it’s a real problem, but as 
long as I own fifty percent of the building, I’m not 
going to walk in and make believe everything’s fine if 
it isn’t.” Pat suggested we meet the foUowing week. I 
wanted to work this out because I like Pat, and I 
respect him, and I think he is an extraordinary execu- 
tive. Pat has one of those great Irish personalities. 
He’ll walk through the Hyatt Regency in Washington, 
D.C., or West Palm Beach, Florida, and he'U know 
everyone’s name, he’ll remember their families, he’ll 
kiss the chef, teU the porter he’s doing a great job, say 
hello to the lifeguard and the maids. By the time he 
leaves an hour later, everyone feels uplifted, like 
they’re ten feet tall. 

So I met with Pat, and he said, “I’ve decided what 
to do. I’m going to change managers. I’m going to put 
in one of my best guys. He's Eastern European, like 
your wife. He’s also very flexible, and they’ll get 
along great. That way, she can come in and talk to 
anyone she wants, and everyone will be happy.” 

Sure enough, Pat made the switch, and then his new 
manager did something brilliant. He began to bombard 
us with trivia. He’d call up several times a week, and 
he’d say, “Donald, we want your approval to change 


140 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Street * 141 


r 


the wallpaper on the fourteenth floor” or “We want to 
introduce a new menu in one of the restaurants” or 
“We are thinking of switching to a new laundry 
service.’ ’ They’d also invite us to all of their manage- 
ment meetings. The guy went so far out of his way to 
solicit our opinions and involve us in the hotel that 
finally I said, “Leave me alone, do whatever you 
want, just don’t bother me.” What he did was the 
perfect ploy, because he got what he wanted not by 
fighting but by being positive and friendly and solicitous. 

As successful as our partnership has turned out to 
be, there was one small clause in the deal that I think 
may be even more valuable than my half-ownership of 
the Grand Hyatt. It’s something called an exclusive 
covenant, and its effect is to permanently prohibit 
Hyatt from building competing hotels in the five 
boroughs of New York without my permission. 

I first tried to get the covenant from Jay Pritzker at 
the time we made our deal, but he refused. Jay is a 
smart guy, and he wasn’t about to foreclose the future 
expansion of his hotel chain in one of the biggest cities 
in the world. We finally got to the closing, and just 
before we all sat down, I was alone with an executive 
from the bank. I pointed out that this was a rather big 
and risky investment the bank, was making, and that 
one way to further protect the loan might be to insist 
on a restrictive covenant, so that Hyatt couldn’t throw 
up a second hotel two years later, right down the 
street. The banker saw the implications immediately. 
He stormed into the room where the Hyatt people were 
sitting, and he said, “Hey, fellas, we’re putting up 


tens of millions of dollars, which is a lot of money, and 
we're not going to make this loan unless we get a 
covenant from Hyatt saying you won't open up any 
other hotels in New York.” 

I was taking a chance, because right then and there 
the whole financing could have fallen through. But 
what I had going for me was that Jay Pritzker wasn’t 
at the closing. The executive representing Hyatt tried 
to reach Jay, but it turned out he was off in Nepal, 
mountain climbing, and he couldn’t be reached. Mean- 
while, the bank gave Hyatt one hour to make a 
decision, or that was the end of the financing. While 
we were waiting, I wrote up a covenant myself. In 
effect, it said that Hyatt can't open any competing 
hotels in the New York area, including the two air- 
ports. The only exception is the right to build one 
small luxury hotel — which I don’t believe would be 
economically feasible anyway. And before the hour 
was up they agreed to sign the document I’d written. 

[ now have in my will a clause describing the 
importance of that restrictive covenant, just on the 
chance that one of my heirs happens not to be that 
sharp. What I don’t want, after I’m gone, is for some 
nice, smooth person from Hyatt to come to one of my 
heirs and say, “Listen, you wouldn’t mind if we threw 
up a little noncompetitive hotel at Kennedy Airport, 
would you?” The simple fact is that Hyatt would love 
to build more hotels. By retaining the right to say yes 
or no, I own something very valuable. 

I’ve already seen the proof. A. N. Pritzker, a 
wonderful man who was the patriarch of his family 



r 


142 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


and who died recently, used to call me frequently 
when he came to New York. A.N. and his son lay 
were very different men. What they had in common 
was brilliance, but where lay keeps very much to 
himself, A.N. was extremely effusive and outgoing, 
almost a teddy bear. They were a perfect combination - 
A.N. built the foundation of the company from noth- 
ing, and he got the banks to back him not because he 
had great assets but because they loved him. Now the 
company has a huge base, and Jay, who is a much 
cooler personality, doesn't need the banks to love him. 
He can be very tough and they still want to do 
business with him. 

Anyway A.N. would come to New York, and he*d 
call and he’d say M Hi ya, Don, I’m here visiting, and 
I'd love to stop over and just say hello to you for a 
couple of seconds.” And I'd say, “A.N., 1 know what 
you're doing. You want to build a hotel someplace in 
New York, don't you?” And he'd say, “I'd love you 
to let us do that, Don, because it's not going to hurt 
you, and it's good for us, and it's good for everyone.” 
And when A.N. would do that. I'd find some way of 
changing the subject, because I liked him so much that 
I never had the heart to say no to him directly. 

There are very few people I feel that way about. 
A.N. died in 1986, and I happened to have an ex- 
tremely important business meeting in my office on 
the day of his funeral in Chicago. It was a deal I very 
much wanted to make, and I'd been planning it for 
months, and people were flying in from all over to be 
there. But I canceled the meeting in order to go to 


Grand Hotel: Reviving 42nd Stieet * 143 


Chicago, and as it turned out, I was never able to 
make that particular deal. I have no regrets. There are 
some people in your life you just want to pay your 
respects to, no matter what it involves. And in the 
end, 1 think one reason my partnership with Hyatt has 
remained so strong — beside the fact that the hotel has 
been so successful — is that I always felt such affection 
for A. N- Pritzker. 



7 

TRUMP TOWER 

The Tiffany 
Location 


I t was not an auspicious start, my meeting with 
Franklin Jarman. 

Rom the time I took an apartment in Manhattan 
in 1971 and began walking the streets, the site that 
excited me the most was the eleven- story building at 
57th Street and Fifth Avenue that housed Bonwit 


Teller. The main attraction was location, but in addi- 
tion, it was on an unusually large piece of property. In 
my mind, that combination made it perhaps the greatest 
single piece of real estate in New York City. There 
was the potential to build a great building in a prime 
location- 


145 



146 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Bonwit was owned by Genesco, a company founded 
in the late 1950s by a gentleman named W. Maxey 
Jarman, who built it into a real high-flying conglomer- 
ate. Maxey started off with a shoe company, and then 
he began buying other shoe companies, and eventually 
he moved into retail stores, purchasing Tiffany and 
Henri Bendel, and Bonwit Teller. But then, in the 
mid-1970s, a tremendous battle began to take shape 
between Maxey and his son, Fr anklin They were both 
strong guys with their own ideas and they both wanted 
control. It became so bitter that they finally came to 
blows at a stockholder meeting. Since I am so close to 
my father, I found the whole thin g hard to believe, but 
the bottom line was that Franklin finally managed to 
push his father out and take over. And so, in 1975, it 
was Franklin 1 called to discuss my interest in Bonwit. 

At the time, I really had no track record. I was 
trying to get the Grand Hyatt off die ground, and I was 
still fighting for my convention center site, and noth- 
ing had yet gelled. But for whatever reason, Franklin 
Jarman was willing to see me. We met, and I told him 
straight out that I would love to buy the Bonwit Teller 
store and building. I knew this was a tough sell, so 1 
tried to find ways to make the deal sound more attrac- 
tive. I suggested, for example, that I would build 
above his store, and that he could keep it open during 
construction. That’s not really feasible, but the point 
was that I would have done almost anything to get that 
piece of property. 

Even before I’d finished my pitch, I could see from 
the look on Franklin’s face that he thought this was 


"frump Tbwer: The Tifiany Location • 147 

perhaps (he most preposterous thing he had ever heard. 
When I was done, he said to me, very politely, but 
also very firmly, “You’ve got to be crazy if you think 
there’s any way we’d ever sell this incredible site.” 
We shook hands and I left, believing that under no 
circumstances would I or anybody else ever purchase 
this property. It was a dead issue. 

Even so, I didn’t give up. 1 began writing letters to 
Franklin Jarman. First, I wrote to thank him for seeing 
me. A couple of months later, I wrote to ask if he 
might reconsider. When I got no answer and a few 
more months had gone by, I wrote again and said I’d 
love to drop by and see him again. More tune passed, 
and I wrote another letter, suggesting a whole new 
way to make the deal. I was relentless, even in the 
face of the total lack of encouragement, because much 
more often than you’d think, sheer persistence is the 
difference between success and failure. In this case, 
Franklin Jarman never budged from his original posi- 
tion. But as it happened, the letters I wrote eventually 
did have an impact. 

Almost three years passed after my first meeting 
with Franklin. During that time, Genesco began to 
experience very serious financial problems. I didn’t 
give any of it a second thought until one evening in 
June 1978, when I picked up Business Week magazine 
and read an article about a management change at 
Genesco. The banks, trying to save the company from 
declaring bankruptcy, bad insisted that a new chief 
executive be put in charge. The man ’s name was John 
Hanigan, and he was something of a turnaround artist. 



148 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


He’d just successfully saved AMF- Bruns wick, which 
had been ready to go down the drain. His specialty 
was something called pruning, which is just a nice 
way of saying that he took companies apart. In other 
words, he’d sell, sell, sell the assets, get rid of the 
debt, and pay off the banks. The key, for a guy like 
Hanigan, was that he came to companies without any 
emotional attachment to its people or its products. As 
a result, he had no trouble being ruthless. He was a 
tough, smart, totally bottom-line-oriented guy. 

At nine sharp, the morning after I read the article, I 
called Genesco, and I got Hanigan on the phone. He’d 
just begun his new job, but to my surprise, he said, 
“I’H bet 1 know what you’re calling about." 

“You do?” 1 said. 

And be said, “Yeah, you’re the guy who has been 
writing all those letters about wanting to buy Bonwit 
Teller. When would you like to meet?" 

“As soon as possible,” I said. 

He said, "Can you be here in half an hour?" 

ft just shows you that sometimes malring a deal 
comes down to timing. Somebody else might have 
called him a few days or a few weeks before me, and 
die whole thing could have turned out differently. 
Instead, I went to see him, and we bad a very good 
meeting. It was clear that the company needed cash 
very badly and very quickly, and that he bad no 
reluctance about selling Bonwit, or any other asset, for 
that matter. It was like a giant garage sale. By the time 
I left, 1 thought there was a good chance we’d make a 
deal very quickly. 


"frump Tower: The Tiffany Location • 149 


Then something funny happened. Jack Hanigan sud- 
denly refused to take my phone calls. I must have 
called him ten or fifteen times over a period of the 
next several days, but I never got through. I figured 
that some other bidder had come along, and that in 
any case 1 was in trouble. I asked Louise Sunshine to 
speak to her friend Marilyn Evans, whose husband, 
David, owned a shoe company that he’d sold to 
Genesco several years before. He’d become a fairly 
large stockholder in Genesco, and that gave them 
some clout. Marilyn said they’d speak to Hanigan on 
my behalf, and almost immediately he called me back. 
I never found out what the delay had been about, but 
Hanigan suggested we have another meeting. This 
time I brought my lawyer, Jerry Schrager, and we 
were able to make a deal. It was really quite simple. 
Genesco owned the Bonwit building but not the under- 
lying land. For the land, they had a lease with twenty- 
nine years left to run. I agreed to buy the building and 
their land lease for the sum of $25 milli on. 

In my mind, that was just a first step. In order to 
put up the building I had in mind, I was going to have 
to assemble several other adjacent pieces- — and then 
seek numerous zoning variances. That’s often the 
situation in New York real estate, but in this case I 
was dealing with an exceptionally prestigious, visible 
site, which meant every move I made was going to be 
unusually difficult, and very carefully scrutinized. 

My most immediate problem was trying to keep the 
deal secret. I was convinced that if anyone got wind of 
the fact that the Bonwit site was up for sale before I 


150 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


"frump Tower: The Tiffany Location * 151 


signed a contract. I’d never make the deal. Once the 
Bonwit store went on the open market, everyone in die 
world was going to be after it, and the asking price 
would go right through the roof. That's why, after I’d 
shaken hands with Jack, I said to him, “Listen, I’d 
like to draw up a quick, simple letter of intent that 
says that I’ve agreed to buy the property for $25 
million, and you’ve agreed to sell it — subject only to 
the drawing of reasonable documents. That way, nei- 
ther of us can walk away from the deal.” To my 
surprise, lack said, “Well, that sounds reasonable.” 
Now Jack is a very smart man, but he wasn’t a New 
York guy, and he didn’t re ali ze how hot this property 
was — so valuable that even in the middle of a depres- 
sion, there’d still be people lined up to buy it. 

Jerry and I drew up the letter of intent right then and 
there. Jack read it, and the only change he made was 
to stick in a clause making the sale subject to approval 
by his board of directors. When he handed it back to 
me, I said to him, “Listen Jack, I can’t live with that 
clause. In three or four weeks, you might tell your 
board of directors not to approve the deal, and that 
would defeat the whole idea of this letter of intent." 
Then 1 asked whether he needed approval from die 
board of directors to sell the store. He said he didn’t, 
and I said, “Let’s just take this one clause out.” He 
gave it a little thought and finally he agreed. I left the 
meeting with a deal — and something on paper to 
confirm it. 

Once I had the letter of intent from Jack Hanigan — 
but before I had a contract — I went to see a man 


named Conrad Stephenson at the Chase Manhattan 
Bank. My father had always done his business with 
Chase, and so 1 figured that was the best place to go 
first for the $25 million I needed to make the Bonwit 
purchase. I explained the deal to Connie — that I was 
buying the Bonwit building and their land lease, which 
had twenty-nine years left to run, and that I hoped to 
put up a great skyscraper on the site. Immediately be 
said, “Unless you own the underlying land, that’s not 
a long enough lease to justify financing.” In other 
words, he was reluctant to put up money for me to 
purchase a site that twenty-nine years later — when my 
lease ran out— could be taken over by the owner of the 
underlying land. But I’d taken that into consideration. 
I said to Connie, “Look, I’ve got two alternatives, 
and I think either one could work.” 

The first one, I told him, was to do a very inexpen- 
sive conversion into an office building, with retail on 
the ground floor. Because I’d be paying such a low 
rent through the remainder of the lease — $125,000 a 
year, which was peanuts, even then — I was confident 
I’d be able to pay off my mortgage and still make a 
nice profit over the next thirty years. But Connie 
wasn’t totally convinced, and even I considered the 
first option my worst-case scenario. 

What I really wanted to do, I explained, was to 
purchase not only the building and the lease but also 
the underlying land. Then, I said, I could build a big 
building without risk of losing it at lease expiration. 
When I told Connie that the owner of the underlying 
land was the Equitable Lite Assurance Society, he got 



152 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Trump Tbwer: The Tiffany Location • 153 


excited for the first time. That, we both agreed, gave 
me a leg up, since I already had a great relationship 
with Equitable. They’d put up a big percentage of the 
financing for the Hyatt, and by this time the hotel was 
under construction, things were going very well, and 
everyone was feeling terrific about the deal. 

The next thing I did was to set up a date to see 
George Peacock, the head of Equitable Real Estate. It 
was September 1978, just a month since I’d first sat 
down with Jack Hanigan. George and I met and I told 
him I was in the process of purchasing the Bonwit 
lease, for which Equitable owned the land, and that I 
saw a chance to forge a partnership that could be very 
good for both of us. I would contribute my lease, I 
said, if they would contribute their land. Together, as 
fifty-fifty partners, we’d build a great new residential 
and office building on this incredible site. 

Equitable could have chosen simply to hold on to 
the site until the Bonwit lease ran out, and then own it 
outright. But the downside, I pointed out to George, 
was that then they would have to settle for a meager 
annual rent from a lease negotiated long before the 
value of New York real estate had begun to escalate. I 
also told George that my other option was to renovate 
the existing building and cam a more modest but still 
decent profit over the next thirty years. In truth, I was 
no longer certain that I could get financing for such a 
deal, but I didn't want him to think that a partnership 
with Equitable was my only option. Then he’d just 
feel free to drive a much harder bargain with me. 
Fortunately, George took to the idea of a partnership 


almost immediately. He was skeptical that I’d get the 
zoning necessary to build the huge building 1 had in 
mind, but he’d also seen what I’d achieved with the 
Commodore. By the time I left his office, he’d given 
me a commitment — subject to my delivering on my 
promises. Once again, I found myself juggling provi- 
sional commitments. 

My next move was to use my first two commitments — 
for the Bonwit lease and the Equitable land — to try to 
get a third, from Tiffany. Specifically, I wanted to buy 
the air rights above Tiffany, which was directly adja- 
cent to the Bonwit site at the comer of 57th and Fifth. 
By purchasing those rights I’d get something called a 
merged zoning lot, which would allow me to build a 
much larger building. Unfortunately, I didn’t know 
anyone at Tiffany, and the owner, Walter Hoving, was 
known not only as a legandary retailer but also as a 
difficult, demanding, mercurial guy. Even so. I’d al- 
ways admired Hoving, because everything he’d ever 
touched had turned to gold. When he ran Lord and 
Taylor, it was the best, and when he ran Bonwit Teller, 
it was the best, and so long as he ran Tiffany, it was 
the best. I’d seen him at parties, and he was a man 
with impeccable manners, perfect white hair, beauti- 
fully tailored suits, and an imperial style. If you were 
casting a movie about the president of Tiffany, Walter 
Hcrving would get the part. 

I decided to be very direct. I called Hoving on the 
phone and introduced myself. 1 was very polite and 
very respectful, and he agreed to see me. By this time 
Der Scutt had done a scale model of the building I 



154 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


hoped to build, as well as one for an alternative build- 
ing, in the event that I didn’t get Tiffany’s air rights. I 
brought both models to the meeting. I said to Hoving, 
“Look, I want to buy your air rights, because that will 
allow me to build a much better building that you 
yourself will like much more. By selling me air rights, 
you will preserve Tiffany forever. No one will ever be 
able to build over it, and therefore no one will ever try 
to rip it down.” The other reason to sell, I told Hoving, 
was that if I didn’t have his air right®, for technical 
reasons the city would require me to put in lot-line 
windows — tiny little windows with wire mesh, which 
would look absolutely horrible, rising up fifty stories 
directly over Tiffany. With his air rights, on the other 
hand. I’d be permitted to put in beautiful picture win- 
dows on the side of the building overlooking Tiffany. 

At that point I showed Having the two models — one 
a magnificent building, which is essentially the design 
of Trump Tower today, the other my hideous alterna- 
tive, “I’m offering you five million dollars,” I said to 
Walter Hoving, “to let me preserve Tiffany. In return 
you’re selling me something — air rights — that you’d 
never use anyway.” 

Hoving had been at Tiffany almost twenty-five years. 
He’d built it into an incredible success, and naturally 
he took great personal pride in his creation. I was 
playing to that, and it worked. He immediately liked 
my concept. “Look, young man,” he said, “I am 
going to make a deal with you at the price you’ve 
suggested. I just hope that you do as nice a job as you 
say you will, because 1 want to be proud of it. In the 


Thimp Tbwer: The Tiffany Location * 155 


meantime, I have one small problem. I'm going away 
with my wife for a month, and I won’t have time to 
devote to this until I get back.” 

Immediately l started to gel nervous, I said, “Gee, 
Mr. Hoving, that’s a big problem, because if I have 
your air rights, I can build a totally different building, 
and that’s the basis on which I'm going to seek my 
zoning variance. If for some reason you change your 
mind while you're away, I'll have done a great deal of 
architectural work and zoning work which I’ll just 
have to throw out.” 

Walter Hoving looked at me as if I’d insulted him. 
“Young man,” he said, “perhaps you didn’t under- 
stand. I shook your hand. I made a deal with you. 
That's that.” 1 was speechless. You have to understand 
where I was coming from- While there are certainly 
honorable people in the real estate business, I was 
more accustomed to the sort of people with whom you 
don't want to waste the effort of a handshake because 
you know it's meaningless. I’m talking about the 
lowlifes, the honor shows with whom nothing counts 
but a signed contract 

With Walter Hoving, I realized, I was dealing with 
a totally different type — a gentleman who was genu- 
inely shocked at any suggestion that he might renege 
on a deal. He also had a way of talking down, so that 
he actually made me feel a little guilty for even 
suggesting that anything could possibly go wrong in 
our deal. 

As it happened, Walter Hoving went away, and no 
sooner had he left than Philip Morris made a deal to 




1 


156 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 

buy the air rights over Grand Central at a price far in 
excess of what I'd agreed to pay for the Tiffany air 
rights, which were in a much better location. Then, 
during that same month, several more air-rights deals 
were made, also for very big numbers. Quite simply. 
New York City was recovering, and the real estate 
market was beginning to go through the roof. I knew 
Hoving was honorable, but I couldn't help worrying 
about how he was going to feel when he heard about 
those other deals. 

Several days after he returned, we met to talk over 
some points in our deal. Sure enough, even as we sat 
down, two of his executives began to try to talk him 
out of making the deal by pointing out what had 
happened in the market. 1 was upset, but I could see 
very quickly that Hoving was even more upset. 
“Gentlemen," he said, “I shook hands with this 
young man over a month ago. When 1 make a deal, 
that’s the deal, whether it's a good one or a bad one. 
And I trust I won't have to explain myself again." 
That was the end of that. 

Later, I heard that Hoving went even a step further. 
During this same period he’d apparently decided to 
make another deal, much bigger than the one with me: 
to sell Tiffany to the Avon Corporation. I thought 
Avon was a rather second-rate buyer for a classy store 
like Tiffany. On the other hand, they’d offered to pay 
such an inflated price that 1 couldn’t blame Hoving for 
agreeing to sell. However, as one of the conditions of 
its purchase, Avon wanted Hoving to agree not to go 
through with the air-rights deal with me. Hoving, I 


"frump Tower: The Tiffany Location • 157 


heard, stood totally firm. If Avon had a problem with 
the air-rights deal, he told their executives, then they 
didn't have to buy his store. They dropped the demand 
and bought the store, and my deal went through. 

Walter Hoving was just a totally honorable, totally 
classy man. That’s exactly what made him such a 
brilliant retailer, and it’s why Tiffany has never been 
the same since he left. I’ll give you a small example. 
Hoving had a policy at Tiffany that when his best 
customers came in, they could pick out what they 
wanted, sign for it, and be billed later. It was very 
simple and very elegant. No sooner did Avon take 
over than their team of accountants started instituting 
new policies, including the introduction of little blue 
plastic Tiffany credit cards. That was fine, except that 
all of a sudden Tiffany’s best customers were told that 
they, too, had to use the little plastic cards. It was not 
only stupid, it was self-defeating. You want your best 
customers to feel special. 

Before very long, Hoving, who’d agreed at first to 
stay on as a consultant, got fed up and left. That just 
made things worse. As long as Hoving ran Tiffany, for 
example, you'd never see peddlers out front on the 
street, selling fake watches and cheap jewelry, block- 
ing pedestrians, and degrading fifth Avenue. Whenev- 
er Walter Hoving saw a peddler, he’d go to his people, 
and he’d start screaming, in his dignified manner, 
“How dare you let them do that?” And within min- 
utes, the peddler would be gone. But as soon as 
Hoving left, a dozen street peddlers immediately set 
up shop in front of Tiffany, and they haven’t moved 




158 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


since. However, I learned a lesson from Walter Hoving. 

I now employ some very large security people who 
make absolutely sure that the street in front of Trump 
Tower is kept clean, pristine, and free of peddlers. 

Once I got Tiffany's air rights, there was just one 
more parcel I needed. Adjacent to Tiffany's along 57th 
Street and leased by Bonwit was a tiny site, perhaps 
4,000 square feet, that was critical if I was going to 
build the building 1 had in mind. Under the zoning 
regulations, you’re required to have a minimum of 
thirty feet of open space — a rear yard — behind any 
building. Without this last piece, I would have been 
forced to chop the rear yard out of the building we’d 
already designed, and that would have been a disaster. 

The piece 1 wanted was owned by a man named 
Leonard Kandell. By buying the overall Bonwit lease, 
I effectively controlled the site, but once again, my 
problem was a short lease. It had less than twenty 
years to run and also included provisions that made 
any zoning changes practically impossible. Fortunately, 
Leonard Kandell, like Hoving, is a totally honorable 
man. Leonard began in real estate by buying apart- 
ment buildings in the Bronx in the thirties and forties. 
But unlike most small landlords, he decided to get out 
when he saw rent control coming. He sold all his 
buildings and came to Manhattan, where he began 
buying up leaseholds on prime property — meaning the 
land under buildings. As the market rose, Leonard 
became very rich, and with none of the problems of 
having to run the buildings himself. Meanwhile, the 
landlords who stayed in the Bronx went down the 


Trump Tbwer: The Tiffany Location * 159 


tubes, because, sure enough, rent control proved to be 
a disaster for diem. 

One reason I’d left Brooklyn and my father's busi- 
ness was to escape rent control, and so from the start 
Leonard and I had an affinity. My problem was that 
Leonard wasn’t a seller. It wasn’t a matter of price, or 
that he had any particular attachment to his 57th Street 
parcel. It was simply that Leonard didn’t sell any- 
thing, on the theory that in the long run, land prices in 
Manhattan were headed in only one direction and that 
was up. He was exacdy right, of course, and though 
we got along fine, Leonard wouldn’t budge. Then one 
day 1 discovered an unexpected bonus in my Tiffany 
deal. I was reviewing my air-rights contract when I 
came across a clause that gave Tiffany an option to 
purchase the adjoining Kandell property within a cer- 
tain time frame. 

I said to myself. Holy Christmas, this could give me 
a lever to make a deal with Leonard. So I went back to 
Walter, and I said, “Listen, you’re never going to buy 
that Kandell site, so would you mind if I also bought 
your option, as part of my deal?” Walter agreed, we 
put it into my deal, and immediately I exercised the 
option. At first, Leonard took the position that I didn’t 
have the right to exercise the option because it belonged 
to Tiffany and therefore was nontransferable. Leonard 
may have been right but it was also possible, in a 
litigation, that I would win the right to exercise the 
option. 

When I pointed this out to Leonard, we sat down 
together, and in no more than twenty minutes, we 



160 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


made a deal that was good for both of us, I agreed to 
withdraw my exercise of the option, and in return, 
Leonard agreed to extend my lease on the site from 
twenty years to one hundred years, which was long 
enough to make it financeable. He also rewrote the 
lease to eliminate any prohibitions against rezoning. 
And while I agreed to pay a slightly higher rent, it was 
still very low for a long lease on such a prime site. 
Leonard and I shook hands, and we've remained very 
good friends. 

It’s funny how things turn around, Leonard is an 
older man, and in the past couple of years, he’s begun 
giving thought to his heirs and his estate. Early in 
1986, he called and said he’d like to make me a gift of 
a 15 percent interest in the land under the Ritz Carlton 
hotel on Central Park South, which is one of his more 
valuable holdings. In addition, he gave me control 
over the disposition of the land when the hotel's lease 
comes up in approximately twenty-five years. His 
purpose, Leonard told me, was to put the land in the 
hands of someone he thought would get the most value 
from it — which in turn would benefit his heirs, who 
retain a majority ownership. Leonard is a very gener- 
ous man and he is also very smart. I’ll be fighting like 
hell for the Kandell family. 

By the time I got the Kandell site on 57th Street, it 
was December 1978, and I was in a delicate situation. 
Fd pieced together everything I needed, I’d managed 
to keep the deal completely secret, but I still had no 
contract with Genesco. As 1979 began, my lawyers 
were still discussing a few final points with the Genesco 


TVump Tbwcn The Tiffany Location * 161 


lawyers, and we expected to sign contracts no later 
than February, But in mid-January, word finally began 
to leak out to the real estate community that Genesco 
might be making a deal to sell the Bonwit site. Just as 
Fd predicted, Genesco was immediately besieged with 
interested buyers for the property, among them wealthy 
Arabs with oil-boom money to bum. And sure enough, 
Genesco suddenly began trying to back out of the 
deal. Even as our contract was being prepared, it 
became clear that if Genesco could find a way to break 
the deal, it would. 

It was then that I thanked my lucky stars Fd gotten 
that one-page letter of intent from Jack Hanigan. 
Without it, there was zero chance my deal would have 
gone through. I’m not at all sure the letter would have 
proved legally binding, but at the very least I could 
have litigated it and held up any sale of the Bonwit 
property for several years. Naturally, I let Genesco 
know I fully intended to do just that if they reneged on 
my deal. With creditors breathing down their necks, 
Genesco, I knew, didn’t have a lot of time. 

On the morning of January 20 I got a call that 
proved to be a blessing. It was from Dee Wedemeyer, 
a reporter from the New York Times , who wanted to 
know tf it was true that I was about to make a deal 
with Genesco to buy the Bonwit building, Genesco, 
still seeking a way out, had declined to give Wedemeyer 
any comment. But I decided to take a calculated risk. 
Fd tried very hard to keep the deal as secret as 
possible until I had a signed contract, because I didn’t 
want to prompt a bidding war. But now the rumors 






162 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


were circulating, and I had a seller who was balking. 
So I confirmed for Wedemeyer that I’d reached an 
agreement with Genesco for the property — and that 
because I anticipated building a new tower on the site, 
Bonwit would most likely be closed within the next 
several months. 

My idea was to put public pressure on Genesco to 
live up to their agreement. What I didn’t calculate was 
a secondary benefit. No sooner did Wedemeyer’s arti- 
cle appear the next morning than all of Bonwit* s best 
employees began heading over to Bergdorf Goodman, 
Saks Fifth Avenue, and Bloomingdale’s to look for 
new jobs. Suddenly Bonwit began losing its best 
people in droves, and it was becoming almost impossi- 
ble to run the store. That, I believe, was the straw that 
broke Genesco’s back. Suddenly, they stopped balking. 
Five days after the New York Times article appeared, 
we signed our contract. The company’s desperation 
saved my deal. 

On the other hand, desperation can be a double- 
edged sword. Because Genesco needed cash so badly, 
and so quickly, they insisted on a very unusual con- 
tract. In a typical real estate deal, you put down a 10 
percent deposit when you sign a contract, and the 
remaining 90 percent at closing. Instead, Genesco 
demanded that I put down 50 percent at contract — $12.5 
million — and the other half at closing. My lawyers 
advised me not to agree to such a demand. The way 
they saw it, there was a reasonable risk that the 
company might go bankrupt before we ever got to 
closing. If that happened, a bankruptcy judge — who 


Thlmp 1bwer: The Tiffany Location * 163 


has powers you wouldn’t believe — might choose to 
take my deposit and use it to pay off other creditors. 
For me to put so much money at such risk, my lawyers 
said, was totally imprudent 

l looted at it another way. 1 wasn’t thrilled about 
putting $12.5 million on die tine, but at the same time 
1 believed that the more cash I gave Genesco, the 
mote money they’d have to pay off debts — and keep 
their creditors at bay. Also, my period of risk would 
be relatively short, since it was in our mutual interest 
to close the deal as quickly as possible. The time 
between contract and closing is often six months or 
more. In this case, we set it at sixty days. 

In addition, I already had a good deal of time and 
money invested in the deal. As far back as August, 
following my Brat meeting with Jack Hanigan , I’d 
begun working on plans for die site, and I'd started 
negotiating with the city for zoning. Actually, within 
minutes of leaving Jack Hanigan’s office, I had called 
Der Scutt and asked him to meet me at the Bonwit 
site. When he got there, I pointed to the building, and 
I asked him what he thought. It was obviously a super 
location, be said, but what did I have in min d for it? 

“I want to build the most fantastic building in New 
York,” I told Dor, ‘‘and I want you to get working 
right away, because I want to know how big a building 
1 can legally build.” 

From the start, size was a top priority. With such a 
great location, the more apartments I could build, the 
better the return I could hope to get on my investment. 
Moreover, die higher I could go, the better the views — 



164 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


and the more I could charge for the apartments. A guy 
named Arthur Drexler, from the Museum of Modem 
Art, put it very well when he said, “Skyscrapers are 
machines for making money.” Drexler meant it as a 
criticism. I saw it as an incentive. 

From the start, everyone I talked with was skeptical 
that 1 could get approval to build a huge glass sky- 
scraper along a stretch of Fifth Avenue filled with 
short, old, limestone and brick buildings. I’d heard the 
same thing about the Hyatt, of course, and so I didn’t 
take the warnings too seriously. Even putting commer- 
cial considerations aside, I felt a tall building would be 
much more striking than a short one. Very quickly, 
Der got caught up in my enthusiasm. When someone 
complained at a community board hearing that the 
building we had in min d was too tall and would block 
too much light, Der answered, only half kidding, “If 
you want sunlight, move to Kansas.” 

For any new building, die permissible height is 
determined by something called Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR). Specifically, the total square footage of a 
building can be no more than a certain multiple of the 
square footage of the building lot. It was possible to 
get some bonuses, but on this lot, for example, the 
absolute maximum FAR was 21.6. Naturally, that’s 
what I intended to go after. I knew it was going to be 
an uphill battle. When Der did his Erst computations, 
using just the Bonwit site without Tiffany’s air rights 
or the Kandell parcel, he determined that our maxi- 
mum FAR was 8.5 — which he said translated into a 
twenty-story building with 10,000 square feet of us- 


TVump Tower The Tiffany Location • 165 

able space per floor. Immediately, I told him to trans- 
form it into a forty-story building with 5,000 square 
feet per floor. Not only would that give me apartments 
with better views, it would also mean fewer apart- 
ments per floor, which is another luxury for which 
buyers will pay a premium. 

Of course I had no intention of settling for a low 
FAR. For starters, my FAR would increase substantial- 
ly when I acquired the Tiffany air rights. In addition, 
developers can get extra FAR by providing certain 
amenities that the City Planning Commission deems 
desirable. On this site, for example, I could get a 
bonus by building residential units instead of just 
offices, on the theory that office buildings create far 
more pedestrian traffic and congestion. In addition, I 
could get a bonus by building a public area for 
pedestrians — something called a through-block arcade — 
on my ground floor. I could get a third bonus by 
building more than the minimum retail space required 
by law. And I could get a final bonus by building a 
public park within the shopping area and arcade. 

Eager for every advantage I could get, I began 
talking to Der about designing an atrium with several 
levels of shopping. As a business, a retail atrium 
seemed a long shot. Enclosed shopping malls have 
been a hit all across the country, but they’ve almost 
never succeeded in New York City. The typical subur- 
ban mall is clean, controlled, safe, and antiseptic, 
which is exactly why most people feel so comfortable 
in them. New Yorkers, on the other hand, seem to 



166 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Hump Hover: The Tiffany Location ■ 167 


thrive on gritty street life and are quite happy to do 
business with street vendors. 

But the way I Figured it, even if the atrium wasn’t 
terribly successful, the bonus I’d get for building 
it — several extra floors in my residential tower — would 
more than make up for its cost. It wasn’t until much 
later, when I began to see how magnificently it was 
turning out, and when we started to attract the best 
stores in the world as tenants, that I realized the atrium 
was going to be something special, a hit on its own 
terms. 

In the early stages, I focused more of my attention 
on the design of the building itself. I wanted to create 
something memorable and monumental, but I also 
knew that without a unique design, we’d never get 
approval few a very big building. The standard four- 
sided glass box just wasn’t going to fly with city 
planning. Der went to work. He probably did three to 
four dozen drawings, and as we went along, I picked 
the best elements from each one. 

At first, we started out with a glass tower built on a 
rectangular limestone base, but that just didn’t look 
good. Later, we tried a design with three exterior glass 
elevators. That appealed to me, but it turned out that 
they’d use up far too much of our saleable interior space. 
Finally, Der came up with the concept of a series of 
terraces stepped back from the street to the height of 
the adjacent Tiffany building. My wife, Ivana, and I 
agreed that the setbacks created a certain compatibility 
and gave our building a less bulky feeling than it 
would have with straight sides, like most skyscrapers 


have. On the higher floors, we settled on a sawtooth 
design, a zig-zag effect that gave die building twenty- 
eight different sides, as if you took the steps of a 
staircase and turned them on their side. 

The design was obviously going to be more expen- 
sive to execute than something more standard, but the 
advantages seemed obvious. With twenty-eight sur- 
faces, we’d be creating a striking, distinctive building. 
Also, the multiple sides would ensure at least two 
views from every room, and in the end, that would 
make it possible to charge more for the apartments. To 
me, we were creating the best of all possible worlds. It 
was a great-looking design, but it was also very 
saleable. To hit a real home run, you need both. 

The next challenge was to have the design approved 
by die city — which meant, among other things, getting 
zoning variances. In one key case, we were able to 
prevail simply by using logic. The zoning law required 
that we build a ground-floor through-block arcade that 
ran north-south, meaning from 57th Street to 56th 
Street. That would have meant putting the entrance to 
the building on 57th Street, rather than on Fifth 
Avenue, and the latter was obviously more presti- 
gious. We simply pointed out to city planning that the 
IBM Building, between our site and Madison Avenue, 
already had a north-south through-block arcade, so 
that ours would be redundant. By running our arcade 
on a west-east axis, we could connect from Fifth 
Avenue through to IBM’s atrium, and therefore all the 
way out to Madison Avenue. Remarkably, everyone 
agreed that was the best solution. The result was that 


168 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Trump Tbwei: The Tiffany Location * 169 


we got the variance that allowed us to create our 
spectacular entrance on Fifth Avenue. 

What the city balked at, from the very start, was the 
size of the building we were proposing— seventy sto- 
ries high, with square footage at the maximum 21.6 
FAR. As early as December 1978, even before I’d 
closed my deal with Bon wit, city planning let us know 
that they considered our proposed building too big. 
They said they intended to oppose letting us use 
bonuses to increase our FAR and that they were very 
concerned about the issue of compatibility with the 
smaller, surrounding buildings on Fifth Avenue. 

Fortunately, by the time I closed my deal in early 
1979 and we entered into serious discussions with city 
planning, I had some ammunition of my own. For 
starters, I could have chosen to build something called 
an “as of right” building — one that doesn’t require 
any variances. Much the way I’d done earlier with 
Walter Moving, I had Der prepare a model of the “as 
of right” building to show city planning. It was 
hideous: a thin little four-sided box going straight up 
eighty stories, cantilevering over Tiffany’s. We took 
the position that if the city wouldn’t approve the 
building we wanted, we were prepared to build “as of 
right” — and we showed them the model and the ren- 
derings. Naturally, they were horrified. I’m not sure 
they believed we’d ever build it, or even that it was 
buildable, but there was no way they could be sure. 

The next thing I was able to use in my favor — 
unexpectedly— was Bonwit Teller itself. At first, I 
assumed I’d just tear down the store and that would be 


the end of it. But very shortly after I’d signed my deal 
for the site, another company, Allied Stores Corpora- 
tion, made a deal with Genesco to purchase the twelve 
remaining Bonwit Teller branches in locations ranging 
from Palm Beach, Florida, to Beverly Hills, Califor- 
nia. Soon after that, the president and CEO of Allied, 
a terrific retailing executive named Thomas Macioce, 
approached me. 

Allied itself had been very close to bankruptcy 
when Macioce took it over in 1966. But over the next 
ten years, he’d transformed it into one of the strongest 
retailing companies in the country. Macioce explained 
to me that while several of the Bonwit stores he’d just 
purchased were quite successful, he felt it was critical 
to continue to have the flagship Bonwit in Manhattan. 
And ideally, he said, he’d like to keep the store at 57th 
Street and Fifth Avenue, not only because it had been 
there for fifty years, but also because the location was 
unbeatable. 

1 told Tom, right off, that there was no way I could 
give Bonwit nearly as much space as it previously 
had. On the other hand, I said, I could give him good 
space, fronting on 57th Street, and connected directly 
through to the atrium I intended to build on my ground 
floor. I showed him my plans, and in a very short 
time, we were able to strike a deal. 

It was very good for Tom, because we signed a 
long-term lease, at a rent-per square foot far below 
what I later got for other retail space in the building. 
But it was also very good for me. I leased 55,000 
square feet to Allied— giving them a store less than 




170 * TRUMP; THE ART OF THE DEAL 


one quarter the size of the original Bonwit — for an 
annual rent of $3 million, plus a percentage of their 
profits. I'd paid $25 million to purchase Bonwit* s 
lease and building, and with a 10 percent mortgage, 
my carrying costs were approximately $2,5 million a 
year. In other words, I was paying out $2.5 million to 
own the site, and getting $3 million back from Allied 
for leasing them a small portion of the total space. 
That meant I had a profit of $500,000 a year and owned 
the land for nothing — all guaranteed before I even 
began construction. Better yet, since I was giving the 
new Bonwit only a small portion of my site, I could 
rent the rest to other retailers. 

But perhaps best of all, what 1 got in Bonwit was a 
store the city very much wanted to keep in New York. 
I was able to make a very simple, very strong case to 
the people at the City Planning Commission. If you 
want Bonwit to return to Fifth Avenue, I told them, 
you’re going to have to give me my zoning. 

Even with that, my approval was far from a sure 
thing. The local community board opposed such a tall 
building. As a ploy, they suggested a six-month mora- 
torium on new buildings, to study whether die area 
was already overbuilt. A Committee to Ban the Build- 
ing Boom sprang up. As soon as that happened, 
politicians had a knee-jerk reaction: they latched on to 
the cause. 

Looking back, I don’t think politics or leverage 
made a critical difference one way or the other. Vm 
absolutely convinced that it was the architecture itself 
that won us our approval. And perhaps no one had a 


Hump Tower: The Tiffany Location ■ 171 

more powerful influence than Ada Louise Huxtable, 
then the chief architecture critic of the New York 
Times. 

1 took a calculated risk by inviting Huxtable to look 
at our model and renderings before the City Planning 
Commission voted on our zoning. The power of the 
New York Times is just awesome. It is certainly one of 
the most influential institutions in the world, and I 
recognized that anything Huxtable wrote would have 
enormous impact. Moreover, I knew that she was 
hostile to skyscrapers in general, and that she almost 
always preferred old and classical to new and glitzy. 
But by the middle of 1979, I was worried about 
whether 1 was going to get my zoning. I figured that 
Huxtable couldn’t make things worse, and that if I got 
lucky, she might write something that would help. 

In early June, Huxtable came to see our plans. On 
Sunday, July 1, the Times Arts and Leisure section 
carried her ‘Architecture View” column about Trump 
Tower. It was titled ”A New York Blockbuster of 
Superior Design.” That headline probably did more 
for my zoning than any single thing 1 ever said or did. 
The funny thing was that Huxtable spent the first half 
of her review complaining that our building was too 
big and suggesting that I had used “every trick in the 
book to maximize its size.” But, interestingly, she 
didn’t blame me so much as she did the city, for 
zoning laws that she said encouraged developers to do 
what Fd done. And then, at the end, she gave us 
several terrific lines. “A great deal of care has been 



172 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


lavished on its design,” she wrote, adding, “It is 
undeniably a dramatically handsome structure.” 

In October, the planning commission unanimously 
approved our zoning. The commission said it would 
have preferred a masonry facade for Trump Tower, as 
more compatible with neighboring buildings, but added 
that they didn’t insist, in light of the fact that I would 
be providing “extraordinary public amenities." In die 
end, we negotiated an FAR of 21, barely less than 
the 21.6 maximum. I settled for just two fewer floors 
than I’d originally sought. That gave me the equiva- 
lent of a sixty-eight-story building, including the huge 
double-ceilinged six-level atrium, which made Thimp 
Tower the tallest residential building in the city. At die 
same time, the city took Huxtable’s comments about 
the zoning laws to heart. Responding to the way I’d 
used bonuses and air rights to create a much bigger 
building, the city amended its zoning laws to prevent 
others from doing the same thing in the future. 

Once I had my zoning, the next challenge was 
getting the tower built. It wasn’t going to be cheap. 
When you build above a certain height, construction 
costs rise almost geometrically, simply because it be- 
comes so much more costly to do everything, from 
reinforcing die infrastructure to bringing up piping. On 
the other hand, because I had such a prime location, I 
felt I could afford it- If I did the job right. I’d be able 
to charge such a premium that the extra cost would be 
irrelevant. 

In October 1980, Chase Manhattan agreed to pro- 
vide financing for the construction of Trump Tower. I 


Thimp Twer: The Tiffany Location • 173 


made a deal with HKH Construction to be my general 
contractor. The budget for the whole job — acquisition 
of the land, construction, carrying charges, advertis- 
ing, and promotion — was slightly more than $200 
million. The person I hired to be my personal repre- 
sentative overseeing the construction, Barbara Res, 
was the first woman ever put in charge of a skyscraper 
in New York. She was thirty-three at the time, she’d 
worked for HRH, and I'd met her on die Commodore 
job, where she’d worked as a mechanical superinten- 
dent. I’d watched her in construction meetings, and 
what I liked was that she took no guff from anyone. 
She was half the size of most of these bruising guys, 
but she wasn’t afraid to tell them off when she had to, 
and she knew how to get things done. 

It’s funny. My own mother was a housewife all her 
life. And yet it’s turned out that I’ve hired a lot of 
women for top jobs, and they’ve been among my best 
people. Often, in fact, they are far more effective than 
the men around them. Louise Sunshine, who was an 
executive vice president in my company for ten years, 
was as relentless a fighter as you’ll ever meet. Blanche 
Sprague, the executive vice president who handles all 
sales and oversees the interior design of my buildings, 
is one of the best salespeople and managers I’ve ever 
met. Norma Foerderer, my executive assistant, is sweet 
and charming and very classy, but she’s steel under- 
neath, and people who think she can be pushed around 
find out very quickly that they’re mistaken. Ivana, my 
wife, is a great manager who treats her employees 
very well, but she's also very demanding and very 



174 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


competitive. Her employees respect her because they 
know she’s pushing herself as hard as she’s pushing 
them. 

We began demolition of the Bonwit building on 
March IS, 1980, and almost immediately 1 found 
myself in the middle of a major controversy over the 
two bas-relief Art Deco sculptures that were a decora- 
tive feature of the exterior of the building. All during 
1979, long after I’d announced my plans and begun 
negotiating for zoning, no one expressed any interest 
in those friezes. No representative from zoning, from 
landmarks preservation, or from any c ommunit y arts 
group ever suggested saving them. Finally, in mid- 
December of 1979, shortly before I was to begin 
construction, I got a call horn someone at the Metro- 
politan Museum of Art, asking if I’d consider donating 
the friezes, and certain iron grill work. I said that if the 
friezes could be saved. I’d be happy to donate them to 
the museum. 

What happened was that we began the demolition, 
and when it came time to take down the friezes, my 
guys came to me, and they said, “Mr. Thump, these 
are a lot heavier than we thought, and if you want to 
tty to save them, we're going to have to add special 
scaffolding for safety’s sake, and it’s going to take at 
least several weeks.” My carrying charges on the 
construction loan for this project were enormous — not 
to mention the extra construction costs of delaying the 
job. I just wasn’t prepared to lose hundreds of thou- 
sands of dollars to save a few Art Deco sculptures that 
I believed were worth considerably less, and perhaps 


TTump Tbwer: The Tiffany Location * 175 


not very much at all. So 1 ordered my guys to rip them 
down. 

What I didn’t count on was the outrage this would 
create. The following day, the New York Times ran a 
froat-page picture of the workmen demolishing the 
sculptures, and the next thing 1 knew I’d become a 
symbol of everything evil about modem developers. A 
Times editorial described the demolition as "a memo- 
rable version of cash flow calculations outweighing 
public sensibilities” and went on to say that “obviously 
big buildings do not make big human beings, nor do 
big deals make art experts.” 

ft was not the sort of publicity you like to get. 
Looking back, I regret that I had the sculptures destroyed. 
I’m not convinced they were truly valuable, and I still 
think that a lot of my critics were phonies and hypo- 
crites, but 1 understand now that certain events can 
take on a symbolic importance. Frankly, I was too 
young, and perhaps in too much of a hurry, to take 
that into account. The point is that despite what some 
people may think. I’m not looking to be a bad guy 
when it isn’t absolutely necessary. 

Ironically, die whole controversy may have ended 
up being a plus for me in terms of selling Trump 
Tower. The stories that appeared about it invariably 
started with sentences like: “In order to make way for 
one of the world’s most luxurious buildings ...” Even 
though the publicity was almost entirely negative, 
there was a great deal of it, and that drew a tremen- 
dous amount of attention to Thimp Tower. Almost 
immediately we saw an upsurge in the sales of apart- 



176 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Trump Tower: The Tiffany Location • 177 


ments. I’m not saying that’s a good thing, and in truth 
it probably says something perverse about the culture 
we live in. But I’m a businessman, and 1 learned a 
lesson from that experience: good publicity is prefera- 
ble to bad, but from a bottom-line perspective, bad 
publicity is sometimes better than no publicity at all. 
Controversy, in short, sells. 

So, it turned out, does glamour. Even before we 
started construction, I'd begun to realize that the 
atrium could prove to be one of the most dazzling 
parts of Trump Tower. At first we just set out to make 
it an attractive setting for retailers, but when I saw the 
final drawings and the model, I realized it could be 
truly spectacular. I also decided I would spend what- 
ever it took to assure that it lived up to its potential. 

Perhaps the best example is the marble. Originally 1 
thought of using the brown paradisic that had been so 
successful for the lobby of the Grand Hyatt. But in the 
end, I became convinced that what was great for a 
hotel lobby wasn't necessarily right for a retail-shopping 
atrium. Der, Ivana, and I looked at hundreds of marble 
samples. Finally, we came upon something called 
Breccia Pemiche, a rare marble in a color none of us 
had ever seen before— an exquisite blend of rose, 
peach, and pink that literally took our breath away. Of 
course it was incredibly expensive — in part because it 
was a very irregular marble. When we went to the 
quarry, we discovered that much of the marble con- 
tained large white spots and white veins. That was 
jarring to me and took away from the beauty of the 
stone. So we ended up going to the quarry with black 


tape and marking off the slabs that were the best. The 
rest we just scrapped — maybe 60 percent of the total. 
By the time we were finished, we'd taken the whole 
top of the mountain and used up much of the quarry. 
Next, I made sure to get the finest craftsmen to cut 
and lay the marble, because unless your workmen are 
the best, you get jagged edges, poor matching, and 
asymmetry, and then you’ve lost the whole effect. 

That effect was heightened by the fact that we used 
so much marble — on the floors and for the walls six 
full floors up. It created a very luxurious and a very 
exciting feeling. Invariably, people comment that the 
atrium — and the color of the marble particularly — is 
friendly and flattering, but also vibrant and energizing — 
all things you want people to feel when they shop: 
comfortable, but also pumped up to spend money. 

Of course, the marble was only part of it. The 
whole atrium space was very dramatic and different. 
Rather than making the railings out of aluminum, 
which is cheap and practical, we used polished brass, 
which was much more expensive but also more ele- 
gant, and which blended wonderfully with the color of 
the marble. Then we used a lot of reflective glass, 
particularly on the sides of the escalators. Thai was 
critical, because it made a fairly small core space look 
far larger and more dramatic. The sense of spaciousness 
was further enhanced by the fact that we used only 
two structural col umns in the entire atrium. The result 
is that no matter where you stand, you get an unimpeded 
view and a sense of great openness. 

The third element that adds to the drama of the 




178 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Trump Tbwei: The Tiffany Location * 179 


atrium is one I actually fought against at first: making 
the entrance from Fifth Avenue unusually large. Zon- 
ing regulations required only a fifteen-foot width, and 
I didn’t want to lose any mate retail space that fronted 
on Fifth Avenue than I had to. However, the city 
pushed very hard for a thirty-foot width, and finally, 
reluctantly, 1 went along. It cost me some very valu- 
able retail square footage, but now I think that what I 
got instead — a spectacular entrance — was more than 
worth it. I give the City Planning C ommi ssion full 
credit for that. 

The last key element in the atrium was the waterfall 
that runs along the eastern wall. It’s nearly eighty feet 
high, and it cost almost $2 milli on to build. Most of 
my people at first favored putting paintings on the 
walls. To me that was old-fashioned, unoriginal, and 
just not very exciting. As it turned out, the waterfall 
proved to be an art form in itself, almo st a sculptured 
wall. Also, it attracts far more attention than we’d 
have gotten if we’d put up even some very wonderful 
art. If most malls succeed in part because they’re so 
safe and homogeneous. I’m convinced that the Thimp 
Tower atrium succeeds for just the opposite reasons. 
It’s larger than life, and walking through it is a 
transporting experience, almost as if you’re in a 
wonderland. 

We tried to create a version of that feeling in the 
apartments themselves. The most dramatic element we 
had to offer, of course, was the views. Since the 
residential units didn’t start until the thirtieth level, 
most were higher than the surrounding buildings, which 


meant they had views to the north of Central Park, to 
the south of the Statue of Liberty, to the east of die 
East River, and to the west of die Hudson. In addition, 
the sawtooth design of the building gave all the major 
rooms in the apartments views in at least two direc- 
tions. And then, to make sure we took the best 
advantage of those views, we built huge windows, 
virtually from floor to ceiling. I would have made the 
windows all the way from floor to ceiling, but I was 
told that unless there is at least some base below a 
window, some people get vertigo. 

The funny thing is that the inside of the apartments 
was less important than a lot of the other elements. We 
quickly discovered that die sort of buyer who spends 
$1 milli on for a two-bedroom pied-i-terre, or $5 
million for a four-bedroom duplex, is going to hire his 
own designer, gut the apartment, and rebuild it to fit 
his own tastes. 

In die end, the reason that we were able to charge 
unprecedented prices for the apartments was some- 
thing beyond any specific luxuries we provided. It was 
the fact that — through some blend of design, materi- 
als, location, promotion, luck, and l iming — Trump 
Tower toe* on a mystical aura. A lot of buildings can 
be successful, but I’m convinced that only one, at any 
given time, can achieve the blend of qualities neces- 
sary to attract the best buyers and command the top 
prices. 

Before Trump Tower, the last building to achieve 
that mystique had been Olympic Tower, on 51st Street 
off Fifth Avenue, built in the 1970s. The key ingredi- 


180 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


cm was the fact that Aristotle Gnassis owned it. At the 
time, Onassis was living an amazing life. He was 
married to Jackie Kennedy and was the ultimate jet- 
setter with mansions around the world, a huge yacht, 
and even his own island, Skorpios. He was very rich 
and very hot, and while Olympic Tower wasn't a 
particularly exciting or attractive building, it was the 
right product done by the right guy at the right time. It 
absolutely stole the top of the market from another 
luxury building that went up around the same time, the 
Galleria on East 57th Street. 

As it turned out, Trump Tower also stole the market 
from one potentially major competitor. Long before I 
made my deal for the Bonwit site, another developer 
announced plans to build a huge condominium tower 
above the Museum of Modem Art, just off Fifth 
Avenue at 53rd Street. By all rights it should have 
been a fantastic success. The connection with the 
museum was very prestigious, the location was good, 
the architect, Cesar Belli, was a big name, and the 
developer made it dear that he would spare no ex- 
pense to build the best. 

However, TVump Tower far outsold Museum Tower. 
First of all, although we got started later on con- 
struction, we began selling apartments in Thimp Tower 
around the same time that Museum Tower did. From 
the start, I could see we had some advantages. Ob- 
viously, we had a better location on Fifth Avenue. 
But in addition, the shape of Museum Tower wasn't 
inspiring. The facade, with its multicolored glass, 
wasn't unusally striking, and the lobby was just another 



My father, Fred Trump, in a 
recent photograph. 



With my sisters and brothers 
in 195 b Left to right: me, 
Freddy, Robert, Maryann ft, 
and Elizabeth. 

H EN ft Y KER N PHOTOG R A PH E ft S 


At age twelve, inspecting 
^ I the f nun da t ion for a six - s tory 
| v building in Queens, New 
York. 

FREDERICK SCHROEDER 


f 



Iw mk U 

At the New York Military 
Academy, May 1963. 

DON DONATO 


Standing on beautiful clean newly made 


ice— the first in six 
years— after successfully turning around the city's stalled 
reconstruction of the Wo 11 man Rink in Central Park, October 
1986. 

TED THAI/TIME MAGAZINE 


With my parents on the New 
York Military Academy grounds, 
spring, 1964. 

DON DONATO 


Ribbon-cutting at the reopening of the Wellman Rink, November 
13, 1986. Left to right: Toller Cranston, Michael Seibert, Judy 
Blumberg, Debbi Thomas, Dorothy Ham ill, Scott Hamilton, 
Borough President David Dinkins, Robert Douglas of the Chase 
Manhattan Bank, me, Commissioner Henry Stern, Mayor Koch, 
Aja Zanova- Stein diet, Dick Button, Jayne Tonal, Christopher 
Dean, Robin Cousins, Peggy Fleming. 


Graduation photo, june 1964. 
DON DONATO 


Leading the New York Military 
Academy contingent up Fifth 
Avenue during the Columbus 
Day parade, October 1963. This 
was my first real glimpse of 
prime Fifth Avenue property. 

DON DONATO 




Bu m i n g t h e m or tgage aft e r Wi th B ob H ope and I vana, 

having raised more than $100,000 October 1986. 
to save Mrs. Annabel Hill's 
Georgia farm from foreclosure, 

December 23, 1986. 


In the vanguard of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial ticker-tape 
parade up Broadway, May 1985. 1 feel strongly about supporting 
veterans and was proud to help underwrite both the parade and 
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial constructed in downtown 
Manhattan. 

©1985 CHASE ROE 



Signing running back Herschel Walker to play for 
the New fersey Generals, September 23, 1983. 




Ivan a as a top fashion model in 
Montreal, Canada, 1975. 


With Ivana on our honeymoon 
in Acapulco, 1977. 


■ 


With Mayor Ed Koch and my father, Ivana, and my mother, Mary 
Trutnp, at City Kail. 

HOLLAND WEMFLE 


Fifth Avenue ticker-tape 
parade that l put together 
to honor Dennis Conner 
and the crew of tire yacht 
Stats and Stripes for 
recapturing the coveted 
America's Cup and 
bringing it home from 
Australia. The parade 
brought over 500,000 
New Yorkers out to cheer 
the victorious crew on a 
bitter cold day in February 
1987. 



TOP; In 1975, at age twenty -nine; proposing a convention center 
for New York City on the 34th Street railyards, for which I held an 
option. Success arrived in 1978, when the city and state chose my 
site over others that had been considered. MARIANNE pern old 


left Explaining to reporters why my site— the ,34th Street 
rail yards— was the best location for New York City's convention 
center, June 1976. bell mark 

right With architects jordan Gruzen and Der Scutt, answering 
questions about the convention center at Hilton Hotel press 
conference, June 1976* BILL mark 



Shooting a scene with Valerie 
BeTtinelli for CBS's highly 
successful miniseries 771 Take 
Manhattan, July 1986. 
bobgreene/cbs photo 


With friend and partner Lee 
lacocca at a recent reception 


Being greeted by President and Mrs. Reagan, 1986. 
OFFICIAL WHITE HOUSE PHOTOGRAPH 


1VU& best wufta. 





New York City's Jacob Javits Convention Center constructed at 
the West 34th Street railyaids, 1 offered to oversee the 
construction, but the city and state went ahead on their own. Not 
surprisingly, the project came in years late and hundreds of 
millions of dollars over budget, 



With the St. Moritz on 
one side of the avenue and 
Trump Parc on the other, 
the Trump Organization 
now controls twin towers 
flanking the Avenue of the 
Americas at Central Park 
South, 



RIGHT; Model of Trump Parc, 
generally considered the 
h igh e st - pri eed, fas tes t- sel li ng 
condominium in New York, 
containing luxurious apartments 
with vast terraces and all-marble 
baths. Adjacent to Trump Parc is 
100 Central Park South, an 
elegant prewar building 
comprising 80 rental apartment 
units . 

0 WOLFGANG HOYT/ESTO 


LEFT: Model of Trump Plaza, a 
175-unit residential tower 
located near Bloom in gdale's at 
61st Street and Third Avenue on 
New York's Upper East Side, 

BAEHR 



Model of the Grand Hyatt Hotel. 
Thi s 34 - s tory, 1 , 406 - roo m 1 u xu ry 
convention hotel is a $ 100 
million development located on 
42nd Street between Lexington 
and Park avenues, adjacent to 
Grand Central Station. 

COPYRIGHT 1978, CRUZEN & 
PARTNERS ARCHITECTS, OER SCUTT, 
CONSU LT1 N C AR C E I ITT CT 


Grand Central Terminal 
restoration we carried out in 
1979 during the construction of 
the adjoining Grand Hyatt 
Hotel, 


m .h rn M 

: t H If . % 

1 * 1 I 


% * * j 

1 f 

«# « j «* I: 


Model of Trump Tower, flagship of the Trump Organization, 
located on Fifth Avenue and 56th Street adjacent to Tiffany. The 
68-story building contains some of the most exclusive residential, 
retail, and office space in New York, and its 6-story pink marble 
atrium { inset above) with an 80-foot waterfall has made it a New 
York City landmark. 
tO RAY CHERNUSH/THE IMAGE BANK 



above. October 23, 1986, the 
luckiest day of my life. During 
construction of a 2,700-car 
garage at the Trump Plaza Hotel 
and Casino in Atlantic City, the 
boom of a huge crane reached 
out too fax to pick up a 22-ton 
beam; the crane toppled over, 
and a large section of the garage 
collapsed. Minutes before the 
accident, at least a hundred 
workers were on the site. The 
crew had just left for a coffee 
break, and no one was hurt. 


above: Model of Trump Plaza 
Hotel and Casino on the 
Boardwalk, Atlantic City's 
tallest hotel and one of the most 
successful hot el- casinos 
anywhere. 

BAEHR 


above; Mar-a-Lago, our winter 
home in Palm Beach, Florida, 



right: A model of the $320 
million Trump's Castle Hotel 
and Casino located at the Marina 
in Atlantic City, New Jersey. 
Under construction at this 
massive development is a maiur 
new tower containing a 
ballroom and super- luxury 
suites, and a spectacular 600'slip 
marina complex. 


I le FT: My controlling interest in 
I Resorts International includes 
I the Taj Mahal in Atlantic City, 
I scheduled for completion in 
September 1988, which will be 
H the largest hotel- casino 
^ anywhere i n the world, with a 
casi n o floor of app roxima te ly 


Sliii 120, (X)0 square feet 


1 


was designed by Joseph Urban in 
the mid-twenties for Marjorie 
Me rri weather Post, the Post 
cereal heiress. This magnificent 
1 18 -room home sits on property 
that stretches from the Atlantic 
Ocean on the cast to Lake Worth 
on the west and comprises 20 
acres of perfectly landscaped 
lawns, a 9- hole golf course, 
citrus groves, a greenhouse and 
cutting garden, guest houses, 
staff quarters, tennis courts, and 
a swimming pool, ft is 
considered one of the most 
valuable parcels of land in the 
United States. 

right; Trump Plaza of the Palm 
Beaches, a 260- unit deluxe 
condominium on the 
Intcrcoastal Waterway in 
Florida, with spectacular views 
of Lake Worth and the Atlantic 
Ocean. 






Tramp Ibwer Hie Tiffany Location * IS! 


lobby. Finally, Museum Tower was marketed poorly. 
Their ads were dull, there was no attempt to create 
excitement, and it came off as just an average building. 

By contrast, we took our strengths and promoted 
them to the skies. From day one, we set out to sell 
Trump Tower not just as a beautiful building in a great 
location but as an event. We positioned ourselves as 
die only place for a certain kind of very wealthy 
person to live — the hottest ticket in town. We were 
selling fantasy. 

The one market we didn’t go after was old-money 
New Yorkers, who generally want to live in older 
buildings anyway. On the other hand, we could appeal 
to several other categories of wealthy people. 

Obviously, we were a natural choice for people 
connected with show business, in the sense that we'd 
created something very glamorous. Foreigners were 
another big market — Europeans, South Americans, 
Arabs, and Asians. Practically speaking, we offered 
them an immediate advantage. At the time we began 
selling Trump Tower, it was virtually the only condo- 
minium in New York. To buy an apartment in a 
condo m inium, all you need is die purchase price, lb 
buy a cooperative — which is what most buildings in 
New York were at the tune — you need approval from 
its board of directors, who have ridiculous, arbitrary 
powers, including the right to demand all kinds of 
financial data, social references, and personal inter- 
views. Then they can reject you for any reason they 
choose, without explanation. It’s a license to discrimi- 
nate. Hie worst part is that many people on these 


top: Displaying one of the early conceptual designs of Television 
City. ©|M7 THOMAS VICTOR 

above West Side raiiyards, the Largest undeveloped waterfront 
tract in Manhattan, encompassing approximately LOO acres and 
stretching from West 59th Street to West 72nd Street along the 
Hudson River— the projected site for Television City, On this 
si te will be both the world's tallest building and the most 
advanced television production complex, approximately 8,000 
residential units, a major retail concourse, and more than 13 
acres of beautifully landscaped recreational space, including a 
waterfront promenade, c:opyricht skvviews surveying. 




182 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


co-op boards get their kicks from showing off their 
power. It’s absurd and probably illegal, but it happened 
to be great for Trump Tower Many wealthy foreigners 
didn't have the proper social references for these 
cooperatives, or didn't want to put themselves through 
the scrutiny of a bunch of prying strangers. Instead, 
they came to us. 

I still remember the morning, just before we began 
selling apartments, when one of my salespeople rushed 
into my office. “Mr. Trump," she said, “we're in 
trouble. Museum Tower just announced its prices, and 
they’re much lower than ours." I thought for a minute, 
and I realized that actually the opposite was true: 
Museum Tower had just done itself damage. The sort 
of wealthy people we were competing for don’t look 
for bargains in apartments. They may want bargains -in 
everything else, but when it comes to a home, they 
want the best, not the best buy. By pricing its apart- 
ments lower than ours. Museum Tower had just an- 
nounced that it was not as good as Tump Tower. 

A lot of people think that we set out to attract 
celebrities to Trump Tower, or that we hired a fancy 
public relations firm to promote the building. The 
truth is that we never hired anyone to do public 
relations, and every star who bought an apartment — 
Johnny Carson, Steven Spielberg, Paul Anka, Liberace, 
and many others — came to us. Nor did I give any of 
them special deals. Other developers cut prices to 
attract stars and celebrities, but to me that's a sign of 
weakness. What really means something is when a 
celebrity is witling to pay full price for an apartment. 


Thimp Timer: The Tiffany Location * 183 


If any press story about a celebrity helped promote 
Trump Tower, I suspect it was one about a sale that 
never actually occurred. Shortly after we began selling 
apartments, I got a call from a reporter asking whether 
or not it was true that Prince Charles had purchased an 
apartment in Thimp Tower. It so happened that this was 
the week when Prince Charles and Lady Diana had 
gotten married, and they were, at that moment, the 
most celebrated couple in the world. Out policy was 
not to comment about sales, and that's what 1 told this 
reporter. In other words, I refused to confirm or deny 
the rumor. Apparently, the reporter then decided to 
call Buckingham Palace. By this time, the royal cou- 
ple had left for their honeymoon and they were out on 
the yacht Britannia, so the Buckingham Palace spokes- 
man said just what 1 had: they couldn’t confirm or 
deny the rumor. 

That was all the media needed. In the absence of a 
denial , the story that the royal couple was considering 
buying an apartment in Tump Tower became front- 
page news all over the world. It certainly didn't hurt 
us, but I had to laugh to myself. Just a month earlier. 
Prince Charles had come to New York for a visit, and 
the IRA had come out in force to protest. As Prince 
Charles walked into Lincoln Center for a concert one 
evening, hundreds of protestors stood outside, hissing 
and screaming and throwing bottles. It had to be a 
frightening experience for him, and 1 can't imagine it 
left Prince Charles with a great desire to take an 
apartment in New York City. Also, while Tump Tow- 
er is a great building, I suspect Prince Charles would 



184 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


find it very hard to get used to any apartment after 
growing up in Buckingham Palace. 

With so much demand, our marketing strategy was 
to play hard to get. It was a reverse sales technique. If 
you sit in an office with a contract in your hand, eager 
to make the fust deal that comes along, it’s quite 
obvious to people that the apartments aren’t in de- 
mand. We were never in a rush to sign a contract. 
When people came in, we'd show them the model 
apartments, sit down and talk, and, if they were 
interested, explain that there was a waiting list for the 
most desirable apartments. The more unattainable the 
apartments seemed, the more people wanted them. 

As demand grew, 1 kept raising the prices — twelve 
times in all. We started out selling for much more 
than Olympic Tower, which until then had been the 
most expensive building in New York. Within a 
short period, we'd almost doubled the price for the 
best apartments on the highest floors. People were 
buying two-bedroom apartments for $1.5 million, 
and before we finished construction, we’d sold a 
huge majority of the apartments. 

The cycles of buyers at Trump Tower became some- 
thing of a barometer of what was going on in the 
international economy. At first, the big buyers were 
the Arabs, when oil prices were going through the roof. 
Then, of course, oil prices fell and the Arabs went 
home. In 1981, we got a sudden wave of buyers from 
Ranee. I wasn’t sure why, but then I realized the 
reason was that Francois Mitterrand had been elected 
president, and anyone smart and wealthy realized 


Thunp Ibwer: The Tiffany Location • 185 


immediately that Mitterrand was going to hurt the 
French economy. It wasn’t just that he was a socialist, 
and that he began nationalizing companies, it was also 
that he turned out to be a dangerous man. What can 
you say about a guy who goes around selling nuclear 
technology to the highest bidder? It’s the lowest any- 
one can stoop. 

After the European cycle, we got the South Ameri- 
cans and the Mexicans, when the dollar was weak and 
their economies still seemed fairly strong. Then, when 
inflation set in, their currencies were devalued, and 
their governments tried to restrict the outflow of cash, 
that cycle ended. 

During the past several years, we've had two new 
groups buying. One is American — specifically, Wall 
Street types, brokers and investment bankers who’ve 
made instant fortunes during the bull market frenzy. 
It’s ridiculous, when you think about it. You get 
stockbrokers, barely twenty-five years old, who sud- 
denly earn $600,000 a year because clients they’ve 
never met call up and say, 4 Til take fifty thousand 
shares of General Motors.” The broker pushes a 
button on a computer and, presto, he's got a huge 
commission. As soon as the stock market falls out- — 
which it will, because it too runs in cycles — most of 
these guys will be out on the street looking for work. 

The other new buyers are the Japanese, 1 have great 
respect for what the Japanese have done with their 
economy, but for my money they are often very 
difficult to do business with. For starters, they come in 
to see you in groups of six or eight or even twelve. 


186 * TRUMP. THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Thunp Tbwcr; The Tiffany Location * 187 


and so you've got to convince al) of them to make any 
given deal. You may succeed with one or two or three, 
but it’s far harder to convince all twelve. In addition, 
they rarely smile and they are so serious that they 
don’t make doing business fun. Fortunately, they have 
a lot of money to spend, and they seem to like real 
estate. What’s unfortunate is that for decades now they 
have become wealthier in large measure by screwing 
the United States with a self-serving trade policy that 
our political leaders have never been able to fully 
understand or counteract. 

Because the 263 apartments in Trump Tower proved 
to be so desirable, I decided to keep a dozen or so off 
the market, much the way a hotel operator always 
holds a few choice rooms free for emergencies. It was 
a way of keeping options open — particularly my own. 
Originally, I decided to take one of the three penthouse 
triplexes on the top floors — about 12,000 square feet 
in all — for my family. We moved in at the end of 
1983. I had offers as high as $10 million for each of 
the two apartments adjoining mine, but I resisted 
selling them, figuring I might ultimately want more 
space myself. 

It proved true sooner rather than Later. In the middle 
of 1985, 1 got an invitation from Adrian Khashoggi, a 
Saudi Arabian and a billionaire at the time, to come to 
his apartment in Olympic Tower. 1 went, and while I 
didn’t particularly go for the apartment, I was impressed 
by the huge size of its rooms. Specifically, it had the 
biggest living room I’d ever seen. I had plenty of 
space in my triplex, but I figured. What the hell? Why 


shouldn’t I have exactly the apartment 1 wanted — 
particularly when I built the whole building? 

1 decided to take over one of the other apartments 
on the top three floors and combine it with mine. It 
has taken almost two years to renovate, but 1 don’t 
believe there is any apartment anywhere in the world 
that can touch it. And while 1 can’t honestly say I need 
an eighty-foot living room, I do get a kick out of 
having one. 

Successful as we were in selling the Thimp Tower 
apartments to the top buyers, we did at least as well in 
attracting the best retailers to the atrium. It began 
when Asprey, a London-based store that sells die 
finest crystal, jewelry, and antiques, selected the atri- 
um for its first branch store in two hundred years of 
operation. At first, they took a small store in the 
atrium. Business was so good that they have since 
expanded to a much larger space. Quality, of course, 
attracts more quality. The next thing we knew we had 
leases with many of the world’s top retailers — Asprey, 
Charles Jourdan, Buccellati, Cartier, Martha, Harry 
Winston, and many others. 

It didn’t hurt, of course, that in April 1983, just 
after the atrium opened, we got a good review from 
Paul Goldberger, who by then had replaced Ada Louise 
Hux table as architecture critic of the Times . The re- 
view was headlined atrium in trump tower is a pleas- 


ant surprise. It began by saying, in effect, that other 
critics had been wrong. The atrium, Goldberger wrote, 
* ’is turning out to be a much more pleasant addition to 
the cityscape than the architectural oddsmakers would 


188 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 

have had it.*' The review went on to say that the 
atrium “may well be the most pleasant interior public 
space to be completed in New York in some years. It 
is warm, luxurious and even exhilarating — in every 
way more welcoming than the public arcades and 
atriums that have preceded it in buildings like Olympic 
Tower, the Galleria, and Citicorp Center.” 

That review bad two positive effects. First, it rein- 
forced the feeling among the retailers in the atrium and 
the people who’d purchased apartments in Thimp 
Tower that they'd made the best choice. But second, 
and more important, it helped bring more shoppers to 
the atrium. They, of course, were ultimately the key to 
its success. 

The odd thing is that no one could ever quite 
believe that the atrium was a commercial success, 
from the day it opened, false rumors circulated. One 
was that while it was obviously a tourist attraction, no 
one really bought anything there. Another was that the 
European retailers stayed only because their stores 
functioned as high-visibility loss-leaders. Still other 
stories had it that the stores on the ground floor did 
well, but those on the upper floors did not. As late as 
1986, a New York Times reporter came to see me, 
obviously prepared to do a hatchet job on the atrium. 
Instead, he did his reporting and ended up writing a 
front-page business-section story about the atrium’s 
extraordinary success. 

Typically, a suburban mall has a turnover of at least 
a third of its original tenants during the first several 
years. Trump Tower lost only a handful of its stores 


Thimp Tower: The Tiffany Location * 189 

during the first three years. More important, no sooner 
does a tenant leave than he is replaced by one of the 
fifty retailers we have on our waiting list. Stores with 
the most expensive merchandise in the world have 
prospered in the atrium. 

Not every quality retailer has found the location 
appropriate, of course. The best example is the experi- 
ence of Loewe, the leather-goods retailer, which was 
among the atrium’s first tenants. Loewe had beautiful 
merchandise. But it turned out that while a wealthy 
woman might pay thousands of dollars for a piece of 
jewelry or an evening gown at a shop next door, she 
was not willing to shell out $3,000 for a pair of 
Loewe’s leather pants, no matter how soft and buttery 
they might feel , So Loewe’s didn’t do well. But in the 
end, everyone came out okay. Asprey, which was 
doing very well next door, took over Loewe’s space. 
Loewe, therefore, got out of a long-term lease, Asprey 
got an additional 4,600 square feet it very much 
wanted, and 1 got a great new lease. 

One last element helped make the Thimp Tower 
deal a huge home run, and that was something called a 
421 -A tax exemption. Ironically, getting my 421- A 
ended up taking me longer than it had to assemble the 
site and complete the entire construction of Thimp 
Tower. 

The city enacted the 421- A law in 1971, to encour- 
age residential development. In return for improving a 
site, developers were entitled to an exemption from 
real estate taxes over a ten-year period. Every two 
years the exemption decreased by 20 percent. Every- 


190 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


one who applied for the 421 -A exemption got it, 
almost as a matter of course. Then 1 came along with 
Thimp Tower. 

There was no question that I was entitled. I was 
proposing to take a ten-story building in a state of 
disrepair and to build in its place a multiuse sixty-eight 
story $200 million tower. Unlike the tax abatement I’d 
gotten on the Grand Hyatt, where I was forgiven all 
taxes, the 421 -A program wouldn't exempt me from 
taxes currently being paid on the site— but it would 
exempt me from additional taxes attributable to an 
increased assessed value on the site. Who could argue 
that 1 wouldn't be improving and better utilizing the 
site with Ihimp Tower? 

Ed Koch could, for one. And the reason had noth- 
ing to do with the merits of my case. It was all 
politics. Koch and his deputies sensed an opportunity 
they couldn't resist: to position themselves as consum- 
er advocates taking on a greedy developer. From a 
public relations perspective, I was vulnerable. It was 
quite obvious that Fifth Avenue wasn't exactly a mar- 
ginal neighborhood, and that I’d probably succeed 
with Ihimp Tower even if I didn't get a tax exemption. 

But in my mind, none of that had any bearing on 
my legal right to a 42 1A exemption. In December 
1980, 1 applied for a 421-A for the first time. A month 
later, I met with Tony Gliedman, commissioner of the 
city's Department of Housing, Preservation and De- 
velopment, to make my case in person. In March, 
Gliedman and the HPD turned my application down. 

I called Koch and told him 1 thought the ruling was 


Ihimp Tower; The Tiffany Location * 191 


unfair, that I wasn't about to give up, and that the city 
was going to waste a huge amount of money litigating 
a case I'd eventually win. 

In April 1981, 1 filed something called an Article 78 
proceeding in state supreme court, seeking to have the 
city's ruling overturned. The court found in my favor, 
but an appellate court reversed the ruling, so I took my 
case to the state's highest court, the court of appeals. 
In December 1982— -nearly two years after my original 
application — the court of appeals ruled 7-0 that the 
city had improperly refused me an exemption. But 
instead of simply ordering the city to expedite my 
exemption, the court told the city to reconsider my 
request. They did — and turned me down again. 

By now I was so outraged that the cost of the 
litigation was beside the point. We refiied an Article 
78, and exactly the same scenario unfolded. We won 
in supreme court, got overturned at the appellate level, 
and ended up again before the court of appeals. My 
lawyer, Roy Cohn, did a brilliant job, arguing before 
seven justices without so much as a note. This time, 
the court again ruled unanimously that we were enti- 
tled to our exemption — and ordered the city to provide 
it without further delay. 

That was just the icing on the cake. By this time, 
Trump Tower was an unqualified success. It had given 
me visibility and credibility and prestige. It was also a 
great success financially. The way I figure it, the 
entire project— including land, construction costs, ar- 
chitecture fees, advertising and promotion, and fi- 
nance charges — cost approximately $190 million. The 


r 


192 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


sales of apartments have so far generated $240 million- 
meaning that even before including revenues from the 
stores and offices, we have earned a profit of approxi- 
mately $50 million on Trump Tower. I also earned 
more than $10 million in commissions as a sales agent 
for apartments in Trump Tower. Finally, the rent from 
office space and the retail atrium generates many 
millions more a year — almost all of it profit. 

Ultimately, Trump Tower became much more than 
just another good deal. 1 work in it, 1 live in it, and I 
have a very special feeling about it. And it’s because I 
have such a personal attachment that I ended up 
buying out my partner. Equitable, in 1986. What 
happened is that Equitable put a new guy in charge of 
its New York real estate operation. One day this fellow 
called me up and said, “Mr. Thimp, I’ve just been 
looking over the books, and Td like you to explain 
why we’re spending so much on the maintenance of 
Trump Tower.’ 1 We were, in fact, spending nearly $1 
million a year, which is almost unheard of. But the 
explanation was very simple. When you set the highest 
possible standards, they’re expensive to maintain. As 
one simple example, my policy was to have all of the 
brass in the atrium polished twice a month. Why, this 
fellow asked, couldn't we save some money by polishing 
once every couple of months? 

At first I was civil, 1 tried to explain that one of the 
key reasons for the success of the atrium is that it was 
so impeccably well-run. I also said I had no intention 
of changing our policy, and 1 suggested to this execu- 
tive that perhaps he ought to take a day to think about 


Thump Tower: The Tiffany Location *193 


whether he really wanted to push it. He called me 
back twenty-four hours later, and he said he'd thought 
about it and he did want to go ahead with cutbacks- 
That was probably the end of my partnership with 
Equitable. Much as I liked Equitable, I wasn’t about 
to tamper with something so successful just to save a 
few bucks. To do that would have been totally 
self-destructive. 

I was upset, but I was also philosophical. I went to 
my friend George Peacock, the head of real estate at 
Equitable, and I explained that we had a problem, and 
that there didn’t seem to be a way out of it. Therefore, 
I wanted to buy out Equitable’s share. In a short time 
we made a deal, and I now own Trump Tower out- 
right. After we*d signed the contracts, I got a letter 
from George Peacock, who ended by saying, “As with 
most things in life, time calls for change and it is best 
to accept that fact. Nevertheless, I shall always be 
proud of my involvement in the creation of Trump 
Tower and fondly remember how we worked to bring 
it about.” 

I was very happy to get that letter. It was a classy 
way to conclude a partnership that had been a class act 
from the start. 




8 

GAMING 


The Building 
on the Boardwalk 


T he first time the economics of the casino 
gaming business really came home to me was 
one day late in 1975. 1 was driving along in 
my car, to yet another meeting about the Commodore 
Hotel deal, when a news report came on the radio. 
Hotel employees in Las Vegas, Nevada, the announcer 
reported, had just voted to strike. Among other conse- 
quences, the stock price of Hilton Hotels, which 
owned two casinos in Las Vegas, had dropped 
tremendously. By this time I knew something about 
the hotel business, but I was still stunned. How was it 
possible that the stock of a company that owned at 

195 



196 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 197 


r 


least a hundred hotels worldwide could be hurt so 
badly by a strike against just two of them? 

When I got back to my office, it took only a small 
amount of research to find out the answer. Hilton, it 
turned out, owned more than 150 hotels worldwide, 
but its two casino hotels in Las Vegas accounted for 
nearly 40 percent of the company’s net profits. By 
comparison, a hotel such as the New York Hilton — 
one of the biggest in Manhattan and one I’d always 
assumed was a huge success — accounted for less than 
1 percent of overall Hilton profits. It was a sobering 
thought. For nearly two years, I’d been working day 
and night to try to build my own huge hotel on 42nd 
Street. I wasn’t getting my approvals, I wasn't getting 
my financing, and it seemed highly likely that the 
whole deal was going to fall through. Now, for the 
first time, it occurred to me that even if I finally got 
the hotel built and it became a major success in the 
greatest city in the world, it still wouldn’t be nearly as 
profitable as a moderately successful casino hotel in a 
small desert town in the Southwest. 

By this point I had invested a great deal of time in 
the Commodore deal, and I tend not to give up on 
something I’ve started. But what I did, shortly after I 
heard that radio report, was take a trip down to 
Atlantic City. A year earlier, a referendum to legalize 
gambling throughout the state of New Jersey had been 
badly defeated. Now a new initiative was on the 1976 
ballot, to legalize gambling solely in Atlantic City. 

It certainly seemed worth checking out. I’ve never 
had any great moral problems with gambling because 


most of the objections seem hypocritical to me. The 
New York Stock Exchange happens to be the biggest 
casino in the world. The only thing that makes it 
different from the average casino is that the players 
dress in blue pinstripe suits and carry leather brief- 
cases. If you allow people to gamble in the stock 
market, where more money is marie and lost than in 
all the casinos of the worid put together, I see nothing 
terribly different about permitting people to bet on 
blackjack or craps or roulette. 

To me, the key questions about legalizing gambling 
in Atlantic City were economic. Was the timing right, 
was the price of entry reasonable, and did the area 
make sense as a location? Atlantic City is 120 miles 
from New York City on the south shore of New Jersey, 
and once upon a time it was a great resort and 
convention center. But when the convention business 
shifted to bigger cities in warmer climates, Atlantic 
City fell on hard times. I wasn’t prepared for how 
badly things had deteriorated- It seemed almost like a 
ghost town, with bunted-out buildings, boanded-up 
stores, and the feeling of despair you sense immediate- 
ly in places where a lot of people are out of work. 

Ironically, the prospect of legalized gambling had 
already sent Atlantic City land values soaring, particu- 
larly along the Boardwalk by the ocean. Speculators — 
everyone from large public companies to fly-by-night 
con men — had moved in like vultures. Families living 
in tiny homes that they couldn’t have sold a year 
earlier for $5,000 suddenly found themselves being 
offered $300,000, $500,000, and even $1 million. 



198 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 199 


It was a little ridiculous, and I decided not to be one 
of the speculators. I didn’t like the idea of putting up a 
lot of pure risk money. Say, fen- example, I paid 
$500,000 to buy a piece of property before the refer- 
endum. If it failed, my $500,000 investment would 
drop in value to almost nothing the next day. If the 
referendum passed, that same piece of land might cost 
me $2 million, but I thought it was a better bet to pay 
more for a sure thing. The economics of a successful 
casino operation are so strong that paying a little more 
for a good site would eventually prove to be a small 
expense. 

Sure enough, the referendum passed in November 
1976 and was signed into law by die middle of 1977. 
By then, however, the Grand Hyatt project was finally 
moving forward and the price of land in Atlantic City 
had become more astronomical than I had anticipated. 
Just as I'd done five years earlier in M anha ttan when 
prices seemed too high, I decided to stay on the 
sidelines a little longer. I knew that if I was patient 
and kept my eyes open, a better opportunity would 
eventually arise. 

Nearly three years passed, but finally, in the winter 
of 1980, I got a call from an architect I had looking 
out for me in Atlantic City. He told me that a certain 
prime piece of Boardwalk property I’d always been 
interested in might be available. The tuning couldn’t 
have been better. For one thing, the first wave of 
euphoria about the casino business had passed, and 
times were tougher. A few casinos — Resorts, Golden 


Nugget, Caesars — were doing terrific business, but the 
more recent ventures had run into all kinds of problems. 

Bally, the newest casino in town, had come in at 
least $200 million over budget. The Tropicana facility, 
owned by Ramada Inn, was experiencing severe con- 
struction delays and enormous overruns. Bob Guccione 
of Penthouse had announced plans to build a Board- 
walk casino, only to find after acquiring a site that he 
couldn’t get financing. Hugh Hefner’s plans for a 
Playboy hotel-casino fell apart after he was turned 
down for a license by the Casino Control Commission. 
A half dozen lesser-known players had come riding 
into town with great plans, only to be derailed by 
trouble with financing and licensing, or intimidated by 
the huge cost of building a hotel-casino. 

Atlantic City’s reputation had also been hurt by 
corruption charges growing out of the FBI’s Abscam 
sting operation. In 1980, the vice-chairman of the 
Casino Control Commission, Kenneth MacDonald, 
resigned after admitting that he’d been in the room 
when a $ 100,000 bribe was passed to a local politician 
by potential investors Looking for help in getting a 
casino license. To make matters still worse, the winter 
of 1980 had been particularly harsh— freezing cold 
and so windy that in January and February you could 
barely stand up on the Boardwalk. 

Suddenly, a city that had been very hot for several 
years turned very cold, literally and figuratively. No 
one was talking about building any more new casinos. 
It seemed possible that the gaming business in Atlantic 
City was going to prove to be seasonal at best — 



200 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


enough to sustain only a few casinos. In my view, 
however, that translated into an opportunity. The worst 
of times often create the best opportunities to make 
good deals. 

The two-and-a-half-acre piece of property that I got 
the call about was at the center of the Boardwalk, just 
off the main road leading into town from the Atlantic 
City Expressway. In addition, the site was directly 
alongside the convention center, the largest space 
available for conventions and major entertainment — 
and a potential funnel into any casino built next door. I 
was convinced that there was no better casino site in 
town. Perhaps not coincidentally, it had already proved 
to be one of the most difficult to assemble. 

By 1980, everyone and his uncle had tried, and the 
result was a legal mess — fragmented ownership, 
overlapping agreements, disputes over options, liens 
on individual parcels, and warring factions. The status 
of the site seemed almost impossible to comprehend, 
much less to untangle. Every lawyer and real estate 
broker I spoke with told me flat out that if I really 
wanted to build a casino in Atlantic City, Fd be far 
better off purchasing a site that was already assem- 
bled. 1 listened to the advice, but I wasn't convinced. 

First of all, I always believe in going after the best 
location, if you can get it at a reasonable price. 
Secondly, I have an almost perverse attraction to 
complicated deals, partly because they tend to be more 
interesting, but also because it is more likely you can 
get a good price on a difficult deal. 

Had I tried to assemble the same site back in 1976, 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 201 

the story probably would have been very different. At 
that point, I had yet to build anything in New York, 
and no one really knew who 1 was. But by 1980, with 
the Hyatt under construction, and the Trump Tower 
project announced, 1 had a much higher profile and a 
lot more credibility. When you're negotiating with 
people who’ve been promised the world a half dozen 
times and gotten nothing, credibility is critical. 

The site consisted of three large parcels, each one 
owned by a different investment group, as well as a 
half dozen small homes owned by individual immi- 
grant families. The key to putting the deal together 
was making every parcel in the deal contingent on my 
getting all of the others. The only chance of building 
the great facility 1 envisioned was to put together the 
whole site. The last thing I wanted to do was invest a 
lot of money and then find myself squeezed at the end 
by one holdout owner who understood the value of 
controlling the final piece in a puzzle. 

That's what happened to Bob Guccione, on the site 
next door. To this day, underneath the rusting frame of 
an unfinished building there remains a single-family 
home that Guccione never managed to purchase. Even 
if he'd gotten financing, he would have had a prob- 
lem. Imagine spending $300 million or $400 million 
on a gleaming, glamorous new facility — but building 
it around a rotting five-room shack. 

Instead, I set out to leverage my credibility. I told 
the owners of the sites that I was prepared to make a 
fair deal, and that unlike ah the others before me, I 
was going to follow through. I pointed out that I had a 



202 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


strong track record when it came to developing proper- 
ty. I also suggested that I might be the only person 
around who still had the inclination to put this deal 
together at ail. If they couldn’t come to an agreement 
with me, I said, they might be sitting on their property 
for many years to come. 

The major part of the deal was for the three large 
parcels on the site. The groups that owned them were 
known as SSG, Magnum, and Network HI, and I 
negotiated with the principals of each group myself. 
Rather than trying to purchase the pieces outright, I 
sought very long leases with options to purchase at a 
later date. My strategy was to keep my up-front 
investment down, and also to avoid seeking major 
financing at a time when banks were wary about 
Atlantic City. In the case of leases, I could cany the 
costs myself. My pitch was very simple: I was pre- 
pared to buy them out, quickly and cleanly. They, in 
turn, had to cooperate with me and with each other, so 
that all closings could be simultaneous. They also had 
to drop the lawsuits they were waging against each 
other over prior attempts to jointly sell or lease the 
land. I did not want to get involved, down the road, in 
a legal morass. 

The properties 1 bought outright were the individual 
homes. I hired local people to negotiate on my behalf, 
because many of those we were negotiating with were 
immigrants who spoke very limited English and weren’t 
used to dealing with outsiders. Other developers had 
paid up to $1 million for tiny plots in strategic loca- 
tions. Because times had turned bad, I was able to 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 203 

purchase nearly all of the houses at much more modest 
prices. 

By July 1980, we had all the pieces in place. 1 
remember closing day very well. We had arranged 
simultaneous closings, beginning on a Friday after- 
noon, in the offices of one of our attorneys in Atlantic 
City. The closings went on around the clock. — it took 
twenty-eight hours before everything was signed and 
sealed. At that point, we had a roomful of people 
almost delirious from exhaustion— but I controlled the 
best site in Atlantic City. 

Before I could move forward, I still had to get 
financing, architectural approvals, and licensing as a 
casino operator. More important, I had to decide 
whether the timing was right to undertake this huge 
project. Fortunately, I didn’t feel pressed to make any 
quick decisions. It was true that I had several million 
dollars invested — including lawyers’ fees, preliminary 
architectural drawings, staff costs, and purchase and 
lease of land. But I was very confident that if 1 wanted 
to turn around and sell my assembled site to someone 
else. I’d get a great deal more for it than I’d put in. 
There are always buyers for the best. 

In the meantime, my first priority was to get li- 
censed by the Casino Control Commission. I’d followed 
Atlantic City closely enough to know that the licensing 
process could be very long, very difficult, and very 
unpredictable. 

Playboy and Hugh Hefner, for example, were turned 
down for a license because the company had allegedly 
paid a bribe twenty years earlier in order to get a 



204 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 

■ — 

liquor license for the Playboy Club in Manhattan. 
When Hefner testified in New Jersey, he took the 
position that he*d actually been shaken down for a 
payment, and that neither he nor Playboy had ever 
been charged with a crime. Even so, his license was 
denied. The state official who cross-examined Hefner 
said afterward that several commissioners hadn't liked 
Hefner’s demeanor and style on the witness stand. I 
don’t believe he helped his cause when he walked into 
the bearing in Trenton, New Jersey, with blazing pipe, 
silk suit and shirt, and a blond bombshell at his side. 
The licensing process is very subjective; if his savvy 
daughter, Christie, had been involved at the time, 
perhaps the outcome would have been different. 

Much more serious allegations of connections with 
organized crime had been raised against several other 
applicants. Caesars and Bally were among them, but 
nonetheless, they both eventually got licensed. What 
became clear to me, as 1 watched the licensing pro- 
cess, was a pattern of something I call bloodletting: in 
exchange for a license, applicants were regularly being 
forced to offer up at least one sacrificial lamb. At 
Caesars World, it was the Perlman brothers, who had 
to resign from the company, and at Bally it was 
William O’Donnell. But unlike a large public compa- 
ny, I couldn’t afford to sacrifice anyone. I had to 
demonstrate an absolutely unblemished background. 

The first thing I did was hire a lawyer to represent 
me. Nick Ribis was originally recommended by the 
Newhouse family, for whom he’d done a lot of work, I 
have great respect for the Newhouses, and when I met 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk • 205 

Nick, I liked his style. He was probably thirty at the 
time, but he looked years younger. The first thing I 
said to Nick was “Look, I’m just not sure a lawyer as 
young as you are can handle a big project like this.” 
Nick wasn’t thrown. “To tell you the truth, Mr. 
Triimp," he said, “I’ve never had a client as young as 
you who could afford my bill.” 

Nick and I agreed immediately on a strategy. I’d 
hold back on any construction until we got a decision 
on licensing. 

In every previous situation, companies who pur- 
chased or assembled sites in Atlantic City had begun 
the licensing process and construction concurrently. 
Licensing could take as long as construction, and the 
sooner the casino got built, the faster it could start 
earning money. It’s perfectly logical — so long as your 
licensing comes through in the end. But unlike these 
other companies, I didn’t want to put several hundred 
million dollars at risk in the meantime. Also, I didn’t 
want to be in a weak negotiating position with the 
Casino Control Commission. Once you’ve begun 
investing huge sums of money, it’s very hard to say no 
to anything they ask for. Waiting to get a decision on 
licensing meant paying carrying costs on my land a 
little longer, and postponing profits, but it seemed 
more than worth it. To this day not many people or 
companies are willing to go through the nightmare of 
licensing in New Jersey, which gives Nevada a big 
advantage in attracting new investors. 

My strongest card was the fact that construction of 
new casinos in Atlantic City had come to a complete 


206 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


standstill. State and city officials, I knew, were hungry 
for new evidence that Atlantic City was still a good 
investment. Because my credibility as a major builder 
had been established, I was confident that state and 
local officials would be receptive to my constructing a 
major casino-hotel in Atlantic City. 1 didn’t want to be 
in the position of pleading with anyone. At the very 
least, I wanted to deal as one among equals, all with 
an interest in making the project work. 

By this time, I’d brought my brother Robert aboard 
to work with me on the project. Unlike me, Robert 
decided after graduating from college to work on Wall 
Street — perhaps as a way of getting out from under the 
family shadow. He started in corporate finance at 
Kidder Peabody. Three years later, he moved to Eastdil 
Realty, and for the next five years did corporate real 
estate finance work. Finally he moved to Shearson 
Loeb Rhodes, where he set up a real estate finance 
group and ran it very successfully, until he joined me. 
1 think both of us always assumed that eventually he’d 
come back to the family business. 

Atlantic City was the perfect opportunity. 1 was 
looking at a potential investment of $200 million, in a 
town 120 miles from New York City, where I couldn’t 
possibly be hands-on every day. What I needed was 
someone totally competent, totally honest, and totally 
loyal to oversee the project. There is nothing to com- 
pare with family if they happen to be competent, 
because you can trust family in a way you can never 
trust anyone else. I called Robert one evening in May 
1980, we talked for several hours in my apartment. 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 207 


and by the next day, he’d agreed to take over day-to- 
day responsibility for Atlantic City. Among other things, 
that meant we’d both go for licensing. 

On a February morning in 1981, Robert, Nick 
Ribis, and I drove to New Jersey for a meeting with 
the attorney general of New Jersey and the head of 
gaming enforcement. I was very respectful, but I was 
also very blunt. I said that I was prepared to make a 
major investment in New Jersey — my own money, not 
corporate money — and that I’d already invested sever- 
al million dollars on my Boardwalk site. What con- 
cerned me, I said, was that New Jersey had acquired a 
reputation for making it very difficult for any develop- 
er to do business in the gaming area. Licensing inves- 
tigations had dragged on for eighteen months and 
more. Much as I wanted to build a great casino on the 
great site I’d assembled, I said, 1 had a very successful 
real estate business in New York and I was more than 
willing to walk away from Atlantic City if the regulatory 
process proved to be too difficult or too taw-consuming. 
The bottom line, I concluded, was that I didn’t intend 
to invest any more money — or to begin any construction — 
until 1 got a decision one way or the other on my 
licensing. 

The attorney general said to me, “No, Mr. Thimp, 
you re net right about New Jersey. The licensing 
process can work here efficiently. I can’t give you any 
promises about the outcome of your investigation. We 
may find out that you’re not licensable. What I can 
promise is that if you cooperate fully, we’ll give you 
an answer one way or the other in six months.” Then 


208 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Caming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 209 


he turned to his director of gaming enforcement and 
said, “Isn’t that true?” 

The director tried to walk a tightrope. “Well, we’ll 
do our best,” he said, “but it may take a year.” 

At that point, 1 jumped back in. “Well, if it takes a 
year,” I said, “then I’m out of here. I’m prepared to 
cooperate fully, but I’m not going to sit around twid- 
dling my thumbs waiting for answers." The attorney 
general nodded, and his director agreed. It was clear 
that six months was our timetable, and they would try 
very hard to meet it. 

The next thing we did was to sit down with the 
members of the Casino Control Commission staff. In 
order to build a casino, you need approval on every- 
thing from room size to casino layout, from the 
number of restaurants to the size of the health club. 
Our intention was to provide the regulators with de- 
tailed building plans and architectural drawings well in 
advance of our construction, so that before we got 
started building, they’d have a chance to review our 
plans and tell us what changes they wanted. 

Other operators — experienced in running casinos, 
but not in building them — hadn’t bothered with this 
sort of planning. In a rush to get their facilities up and 
open, many began construction before they got final 
approvals — only to have the regulators show up and 
say, “No, this room is too small,” or “No, this slot 
machine needs to be there instead of here.” From long 
experience, I know that midconstruction changes are 
extremely costly and perhaps the key reason so many 
major projects suffer huge cost overruns. 


With so many regulators and regulations to satisfy, 
we had one major advantage: the fact that we are not a 
bureaucracy. In most large public corporations, getting 
an answer to a question requires going through seven 
layers of executives, most of whom are superfluous in 
the first place. In our organization, anyone with a 
question could bring it directly to me and get an 
answer immediately. That’s precisely why I’ve been 
able to act so much faster than my competitors on so 
many deals. 

Sure enough, the gaming division concluded its 
investigation and issued its report on October 16, 
1981, nearly six months from the day they began. 
They had lived up to their word. Better yet, both 
Robert and I got an absolutely clean bill. The Division 
of Gaming Enforcement recommended licensing both 
of us. 

My actual licensing hearings weren’t scheduled for 
several months alter the enforcement division report 
was complete. In the meantime, we managed to get all 
the necessary approvals for our construction. Among 
them was permission from the city to build a skyway 
connection between our facility and the convention 
center next door. One consequence was that we could 
build part of our facility over the road and thus end up 
with one of the biggest hotels in town on one of the 
smaller sites. Unlike the owners of many of the 
Boardwalk hotels, we oriented our rooms and restau- 
rants to the ocean. With such beautiful views avail- 
able, why not take maximum advantage of them? 

The second issue we worked on was financing— 


210 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Gaming: The Building an the Boardwalk ■ 211 


which was hardly a given. Most banks had an unwrit- 
ten policy against making loans in the gaming busi- 
ness, because gaming had an unsavory reputation. My 
problem, ironically, was almost the opposite. Our 
reputation among banks was very good, but when it 
came to the g amin g business, we had no track record 
at all. My solution was to try using that to our 
advantage. Better to lend to a reputable company with 
a clean slate. I’d say, than to an experienced gaming 
operator with a questionable reputation. Also, I said, 
because we were proven developers and builders, we 
were in a far better position than most casino compa- 
nies were to assure any lender that we’d come in on 
time and on budget. 

Manufacturers Hanover, which had helped finance 
the Grand Hyatt, was among the banks that had a 
vague policy against making loans in the gaming 
business. Nonetheless, they agreed to provide me with 
funding because of our successful relationship in build- 
ing the Hyatt. I wasn’t thrilled about the terms they 
were offering us, but it was bard for me to complain: I 
was lucky to get financing at all. 

On March 15, 1982, with provisional financing in 
place and all my architectural and building plans 
approved, I went to Trenton, New Jersey, for licensing 
hearings before the Casino Control Commission. Hear- 
ings for other companies had sometimes dragged on 
for six to eight weeks. Shortly after 10:15 a. m. I took 
the stand. I testified for seventeen minutes. Just before 
noon, the commissioners voted unanimously to license 
both Robert and me, as well as our corporate entity, 


the Ihimp Plaza Corporation. I was finally on my 
way. 

Then something totally serendipitous happened. One 
morning in June, I got a call at my office from a man 
named Michael Rose. I was impressed. I’d never met 
the man, but I knew that he was the chairman of 
Holiday I nns . 1 picked up the phone, and Rose intro- 
duced himself. He was very pleasant, and he said he’d 
like to come up from Memphis to see me. 

I didn’t even ask the reason. A guy in Rose’s 
position doesn’t suggest a meeting unless he’s got 
something worth talking about. Also, 1 was fairly sure 
I knew his agenda. I assumed he was interested in 
buying a property I’d purchased a couple of years 
earlier, the Baibizon-Plaza Hotel on Central Park South 
and Avenue of the Americas. I knew Holiday Inns had 
been looking for a prestigious location in New York 
City, and I’d let the word out in the real estate 
community that 1 might consider selling the Barbizon 
for the right price. 

A week later, Mike Rose came to see me. Robert 
and Harvey Freeman joined us. Rose was an impressive- 
looking guy, tall, well-dressed, and very much the 
gentleman. I launched right into a pitch about what a 
great piece of property the Barbizon was, an incredible 
location, a piece of the rock, nothing like it, how 
smart he was to come and see me about it. While I 
really didn’t want to sell it, I said, perhaps I could be 
convinced in this case. For ten minutes 1 just ranted 
and raved while Mike Rose, the chairman of Holiday 
Inns, sat and listened very politely without saying 


212 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


anything. Finally, looking a little embarrassed, he said 
to me, “1 don’t think you understand, Donald. I’m not 
interested in the Barhizon-Plaza. I’m interested in 
being your partner in Atlantic City. That’s what I’m 
here to talk about.” 

I like to pride myself on rolling with the punches. I 
had never thought of a partner in Atlantic City, but I 
jumped right back in and started talking with the same 
enthusiasm about our plans there. I said that we had 
the best site on the Boardwalk, that we’d designed the 
best facility, that we had our approvals and financing 
in place, and that we planned to be open for business 
in less than two years. 

Two things intrigued me immediately about Holiday 
Inns. First, the company had a lot of gaming experi- 
ence. Second, they had the ability to finance the deal 
themselves, which could take me off the hook person- 
ally. What wasn’t clear to me was why Rose might be 
interested in a partnership. Holiday already owned one 
successful casino in Atlantic City, Hanah’s at the 
Marina. I knew they were interested in a Boardwalk 
casino, but they had already bought a very costly 
Boardwalk site, and I’d just assumed that’s where 
they’d build. 

Nonetheless, I decided to play a little coy. After ail, 
he’d come to see me. “Listen, Mike,” I said, “I have 
my financing. I have my license, and I have my 
approvals. Frankly, I don’t need a partner. But what is 
it exaedy that you have in mind?” 

Rose explained that he was interested in my site by 
virtue of its location, but more important, because of 


Gaming: Hie Building on the Boardwalk • 213 


my reputation as a builder who came in on time and 
on budget. Like most other casino operators. Holiday 
had experienced endless problems in construction and 
had run over budget by tens of millions of dollars on 
Harrah’s Marina. Rose particularly liked the idea, he 
said, that we were already under construction. The 
point. Rose concluded, was that Holiday simply couldn’t 
justify major overruns to stockholders a second time. 
Making a deal with us, he said, seemed like a good 
way to many their management expertise with our 
ability as builders. 

Rose had a specific deal in mind. We'd build the 
hotel, they’d manage it, and we’d split the profits 
fifty-fifty. In addition, he said, they’d put up $50 
million of their own money toward construction and 
reimburse me immediately for approximately $22 mil- 
lion of my expenses up to that point. We also agreed 
they’d take over responsibility for financing and use 
the Holiday Inns guarantee to get us a very prime rate. 
As a final inducement to make the deal. Rose said that 
Holiday would guarantee me against any operating 
losses for a period of five years from the date the 
casino opened and pay me a large construction fee. 

This was almost too good to believe. Several times, 
I looked over at Robert and Harvey just to see if 
perhaps I was missing something. They just smiled. 
By the time Mike Rose left my office, we had shaken 
hands on the basic elements of a partnership in Atlantic 
City. It was still subject to the drawing of documents, 
and to approval from his board of directors. 1 assumed 
that they’d exact some concessions along the way. But 


214 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Coming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 215 


as long as the basic concept remained intact — no 
downside for me and a 50 percent share of the upside — 
it was an extraordinary deal. Better yet, I still believed 
I was about to enter into a partnership with a quality 
company, run by highly competent casino and hotel 
operators. After all, I thought, what the hell did I 
know about running a huge casino-hotel anyway? 

Once we’d finished our negotiations, the final step 
was approval of the deal by Holiday’s board of direc- 
tors. In many situations, board approval of manage- 
ment initiatives is merely a formality. In this case, I 
worried that Rose might use his board to help him get 
out of dte deal, or at least force changes in it. 

Rose scheduled his annual board of directors meet- 
ing in Atlantic City so that the board would have an 
opportunity to see the proposed site and also to assess 
our progress in construction. It was the latter that 
worried me, since we had yet to do much work on the 
site. One week before the board meeting, I got an 
idea. 

I called in my construction supervisor and told him 
that I wanted him to round up every bulldozer and 
dump truck he could possibly find, and put them to 
work on my site immediately. Over the next week, I 
said, I wanted him to transform my two acres of 
nearly vacant property into die most active construc- 
tion site in the history of the world. What the bulldoz- 
ers and dump trucks did wasn’t important, I said, so 
long as they did a lot of it. If they got some actual 
work accomplished, all the better, but if necessary, he 
should have the bulldozers dig up dirt from one side of 


the site and dump it on the other. They should keep 
doing that, I said, until I gave him other instructions. 

The supervisor looked a little bewildered. "Mr. 
Trump,” he said, “I have to tell you that I’ve been in 
business for a lot of years and this is the strangest 
request I’ve ever gotten. But I’ll do ray best.” 

One week later, I accompanied top Holiday Tnn« 
executives and the entire board of directors out to the 
Boardwalk. It looked as if we were in the midst of 
building the Grand Coulee Dam. There were so many 
pieces of machinery on this site that they could barely 
maneuver around each other. These distingiikhprt cor- 
porate leaders looked on, some of them visibly awed. 
I’ll never forget one of them turning to me, shaking 
his head, and saying, “Yon knew, it’s great when 
you’re a private guy, and you can just pull out all the 
stops.” 

A few minutes later, another board member walked 
over to me. His question was very simple. “How 
come,” he said, “that guy over there is filling up that 
bole, which he just dug?” This was difficult for me to 
answer, but fortunately, this board member was more 
curious than he was skeptical. The board walked away 
from the site absolutely convinced that it was the 
perfect choice. Three weeks later, on June 30, 1982, 
we signed a partnership agreement. 

Our budget was $220 million — $50 million from 
Holiday directly, $ 1 70 milli on on a loan they guaranteed — 
and that included everything: carrying costs, construc- 
tion, operating expenses, and required cash reserves. 
We projected completion in May 1984, but I was 



216 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 

confident we could finish ahead of schedule, and even 
under budget, based on how carefully we’d done our 
planning. 

One way we stood to save money was from some- 
thing known as value engineering. Say, for example, 
that your architect shows you a certain door he wants 
to use, which has four hinges on it. Before you 
approve the door, you have your engineer look at it, 
and perhaps he says, “Look, you only need two 
hinges to hang that door, or three if you want to do a 
really good job." So you eliminate one ten-dollar 
hinge, and you multiply that times 2,000 doors, and 
the paving on that one tiny item comes to $20,000, 
Another good example was the installation of the cooling 
towers for our air-conditioning system. Originally our 
architects placed them on the roof of the hotel tower. 
Through value engineering we determined that we’d 
save a lot of money by installing them on a lower 
section of roof, just seven floors up, because that roof 
could be poured much sooner. In turn we’d be able to 
start all the piping and electrical work for toe air- 
conditioning six months earlier. 

The second way we saved money was by producing 
very complete plans, so that contractors could bid on 
every aspect of the job. When you have incomplete 
drawings, a smart contractor will often come in and 
underbid the job just to get it, knowing he’ll be able to 
more than cover his costs through the change orders 
that inevitably occur as plans become more complete. 

The final thing that helped us keep costs down was 
the state of the construction industry in Atlantic City 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 217 


in the spring of 1982. The only casino still under 
construction by then was the Tropicana, and thousands 
of local construction workers were either out of work 
or about to be. That gave us a lot of leverage with 
contractors, who had to either cover a certain overhead 
or go out of business. I wasn’t looking to force these 
guys to make such bad deals that they’d lose money. 
On toe other hand, 1 was in a position to negotiate 
very reasonable prices. 

I got the building finished right on schedule for a 
May 14 opening. That meant we’d be able to take 
advantage of the Memorial Day weekend, traditionally 
the three biggest days of the year for the casino 
business in Atlantic City. I also came in slightly under 
the original budget, at $218 million. It represented the 
first casino-hotel in Atlantic City ever built on time 
and on budget. 

On May 14, the casino opened to a public response 
that exceeded my wildest expectations. It was a major 
media event attended by thousands of people, includ- 
ing most of New Jersey’s principal officials. The 
governor, Thomas Kean, was the main speaker, and he 
was extremely generous in praising what we had 
accomplished. His praise was echoed by Richard 
Goeglein, then president of Harrah’s, who told the 
crowd that for us to have completed such a huge 
facility on time and on budget was “a near miracle in 
this day and age.” 

The moment we opened the doors, thousands of 
people poured in. Everyone was hungry to check out 
the newest game in town. In a matter of minutes, they 



218 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


were lined up three and four deep at the tables and the 
slot machines. 

It is public knowledge, of course, that Holiday Inns 
and I had many, many disagreements over the manage- 
ment of the facility. But under the agreement 1 finally 
made to buy out Holiday’s share, I am precluded from 
saying anything in detail about those conflicts. While 
my attorneys unanimously believe that I would win 
any legal battle over my First Am endment rights on 
this issue, that’s just not the way 1 do business. As far 
as I’m concerned, a deal is a deal, and I live up to 
what I’ve agreed to, even if I don’t believe I’m 
technically obligated by any specific contractual 
provision. 

Suffice it to say that my ultimate buyout of Holiday 
Inns’ share of our casino-hotel in February 1986 was 
one of my most savored transactions. 

One reason that I particularly liked owning the 
facility myself — rather than with any partner — has to 
do with the value of depreciation. Depreciation is the 
percentage of the total value of a building that an 
owner is permitted to deduct each year from his 
taxable earnings. The rationale is that money spent to 
maintain a building — to offset its normal wear and 
tear — shouldn’t be taxable. 

Put simply, depreciation permits you to pay lower 
taxes on your earnings. For example, if the cost of our 
facility in Atlantic City was $400 million and we were 
permitted to depreciate at the rate of 4 percent a year, 
that would mean we could deduct $16 million from 
our taxable profits each year. In other words, if we 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk • 219 


earned a pretax profit of $16 million, our earnings, 
after depreciation, would actually be reported as zero. 

Most shareholders and Wall Street types only look 
at the bottom line, which shows a profit reduced by 
depreciation. As a result, corporate managers don’t 
like depreciation much. It only makes them appear 
less successful. But I don’t have to please Wall Street, 
and so I appreciate depreciation. For me the relevant 
issue isn’t what I report on the bottom line, it’s what I 
get to keep. 

The best part of the deal, however, was the facility I 
now owned outright. Merely by running it myself, I 
felt certain, I could earn a far bigger profit. In addi- 
tion, I planned to build new suites and restaurants. 

Financing, of course, now became my responsibili- 
ty. The prime rate had been around 14 percent when I 
first started looking at property in Atlantic City. By 
mid- 1986, it had dropped to 9 percent. My problem 
with bank financing, even at these lower rates, was 
that I'd still be required to put myself personally on 
the line for the money. I didn’t find that appealing. 

As a result, I decided to seek public financing for 
the project, through a bond issue. The downside was 
that I’d have to pay a higher interest rate to attract 
buyers, but the upside was that once the issue sold 
out, I wouldn’t be personally liable. In the end. Bear 
Steams was able to sell an offering for $250 million — 
which not only covered the $50 million cash due to 
Holiday but also permitted me to pay off the $170 
million mortgage on the building and left me the 
money to build a suitable parking facility. Interest 



220 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk • 221 


payments on the financing came to just above $30 
million a year. That was about $7 million a year more 
than I'd have paid for bank financing, but to me it was 
money well spent. By relieving me of personal finan- 
cial liability, it assured I'd sleep better at night. 

During this same period, I hired a new general 
manager for the facility, which I had renamed Trump 
Plaza Hotel and Casino. 1 looked first at my best 
competitors. At the time, Stephen Hyde was executive 
vice president and chief operating officer under Steve 
Wynn at the Golden Nugget. Before that, he'd worked 
at the Sands and at Caesars, both top casinos. When I 
asked people in town to name the best casino execu- 
tives, Hyde was always at the top of the list. As soon 
as we met, I understood why. He had a lot of gaming 
experience, he was a very sharp guy and highly 
competitive, but most of all, he had a sense of how to 
manage to the bottom line. A lot of managers focus on 
maximizing revenue since that’s what gets reported 
publicly most often. The smarter guys understand that 
while big revenues are great, die real issue is the 
spread between the revenues and costs— because that’s 
your profit. 

No sooner had I hired Steve than we turned around 
and hired away a dozen of the best people who’d 
worked for him over the years, including Paul Patay, 
the number-one food-and-beverage man in Atlantic 
City. 1 have a very simple rule when it comes to 
management: hire the best people from your competi- 
tors, pay them more than they were earning, and give 


them bonuses and incentives based cm their perfor- 
mance. That’s how you build a first-class operation. 

In 1985, the first full year of operation under 
Harrah’s management, the facility earned a gross oper- 
ating profit of approximately $35 million before inter- 
est, taxes, and depreciation. For 1986, Hanah’s projected 
a gross operating profit of $38 million. Based on the 
first five months during which they continued to man- 
age the facility, they were running just slightly under 
projections. 

We took over on May 16. For the full year, our gross 
operating profit was nearly $58 million, or $20 million 
more than Harrah’s had projected. This was despite 
the fact that in June we closed down our existing 
parking lot to begin construction on the new garage. 
We’re estimating that by 1988 our gross operating 
profit will reach $90 million. 

By all rights, that should be the end of the story. 
However, success running the Boardwalk facility with 
my own management made me see a broader opportu- 
nity. Specifically, I started to look around at other 
possible deals to buy companies that owned casinos. 
Holiday Inns was an obvious target. Even after selling 
me the Boardwalk facility, they still owned three other 
casinos — one in Atlantic City and two in Nevada — as 
well as nearly a thousand hotels around the world. 

As a result, in mid-August, two months after buying 
them out in Atlantic City, I began purchasing stock in 
Holiday. By September 9, I’d purchased nearly 5 
percent of the company, or some one million shares. 
At chat point, I bad two basic options: One was to hold 



222 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


the stock as an investment. The other was to go for 
control. 

1 had no doubt the company was undervalued. For 
one thing, because they owned so much real estate, 
they were entitled to large write-offs for depreciation. 
Therefore they reported net profits far below what they 
were actually able to retain. On the basis of a stock 
price of $54 a share in early August 1986, I was in a 
position to purchase effective control of the company 
for not much more than $1 billion. In one scenario, for 
example, I would sell off all of the noncasino hotels — 
perhaps for as much as $700 million — and retain just 
the three casino-hotels, which by themselves were 
worth nearly that much. 

No sooner did word get out that I’d begun accumu- 
lating Holiday Inns stock than its price started to rise. 
I assume arbitrageurs were buying up the stock, figur- 
ing that either I’d make a move for control, or some- 
one else would. By early October, the price of the 
stock had reached 72. 

On Wednesday, November 11, I beard from Alan 
Greenberg of Bear Steams that Holiday was restructuring 
the company to fend off any potential hostile bid and 
was going to barrow $2.8 billion in order to pay an 
immediate $65-a-share dividend to the shareholders. 
The stock jumped to 76. Without hesitation, I told 
Alan to sell, and he agreed. 1 still believe 1 could have 
overcome any barriers Holiday tried to put in my way, 
but I just wasn't particularly eager to spend my life in 
the court with these guys. The alternative — earning a 
huge profit on my investment without any battle — 


Gaming: The Building on the Boardwalk * 223 


seemed far more appealing. By the end of the week 
I’d sold my entire stake in Holiday Inns — meaning 
that in just eight weeks, I earned a profit of many 
millions of dollars. Looked at another way, 1 earned 
back from my Holiday Inns stock much of the money 
Td paid them just three months earlier to buy their 
share of my casino in Atlantic City. 

Obviously, I can’t complain. Perhaps no one was 
better rewarded by Holiday than I was. But, in a way, 
I got something even more valuable than money from 
the experience: a first-hand view of corporate manage- 
ment in America. 



y 


9 

WYNN-FALL 

The Battle 
for Hilton 


I n my wildest fantasy, it never occurred to me 
that I would someday purchase the huge casino- 
hotel that the Hilton Hotels Corporation began 
building in Atlantic City in 1984. To the contrary, I 
watched with some dismay the progress of construc- 
tion. I hardly relished another tough competitor in 
town, especially when the Boardwalk hotel I owned with 
Harrah’s wasn’t performing well even against the existing 
competition. Worse yet, it was quite obvious that Hilton — 
after several years of indecision about Atlantic City — 
was finally going all-out with a major facility. 

To me, Hilton was a hard company to figure. It was 
225 


22 6 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Wynn-Fall: The Battle foi Hilton * 227 


founded in 1921 by Conrad Hilton, who built it into 
one of the great hotel chains in the world. His son 
Barron joined the company in the 1950s, and of course 
it was only a matter of time before he took over. It had 
nothing to do with merit; it’s called birthright. In 
1966, Conrad finally retired, and Barron was named 
chief executive. It’s not easy to make your own mark 
on a company your father founded and built into a 
huge success. Some sons opt out altogether and don’t 
even try to compete. Others are content to manage 
what their fathers have already built. A few sons set 
out to outdo their fathers at the same game, and that 
may be the toughest thing of all, particularly when the 
father’s name is Conrad Hilton. 

Barron’s first major responsibility, back in 1959, 
was to run Hilton’s Carte Blanche credit card busi- 
ness, which they'd just bought. He screwed it up and 
Carte Blanche lost millions of dollars over die next six 
years. Hilton finally threw in the towel in 1966 and 
sold out to Citibank. In 1967, Barron convinced his 
father to sell Hilton's international hotel division to 
TWA in exchange for TWA stock, which was selling 
for about $90 a share. There was just one problem: 
OPEC. Almost immediately, oil prices started going 
through the roof, which devastated the airlines. Within 
eighteen months, TWA stock had dropped by half, and 
by 1974, it was down to $5 a share. Until Carl Icahn 
took control of the company and turned it around 
recently, the stock was worth far less than it should 
have been. On the other hand, the international hotels 
that Hilton sold, which were recently sold again for 


close to $1 billion, did great business. They earned 
about $70 million in 1983 — almost as much as Hilton 
earned from all its American hotels the same year. 
That’s partly because Hilton, resting on its past reputa- 
tion, had lost considerable ground in the luxury market 
to more aggressive competitors such as Marriott and 
Hyatt. The once-great Hilton name ceased being syn- 
onymous with the best in hotels. 

Barron Hilton did make one decision that proved 
successful: getting into casino gambling. In 1972 Hilton 
purchased two Nevada casinos for about $12 millio n — 
die Las Vegas Hilton and the Flamingo Hilton. Together, 
the two casinos began to account for a growing percent- 
age of Hilton’s profits — 30 percent in 1976, 40 percent 
in 1981, and 45 percent, or some $70 million, in 1985. 

Despite that success, Barron couldn’t seem to make 
up his mind about Atlantic City. Hilton purchased a 
site at the Marina around the time gambling was 
legalized, began moving forward, stopped suddenly, 
and then started again half-heartedly. By the time. 
Hilton finally committed to construction in 1984, most 
of its major Nevada competitors — inclu din g Bally, 
Caesars, Harrah’s, Sands, and the Golden Nugget — 
already had their facilities up, operating, and earning 
huge profits in Atlantic City. 

I have to say this much for Hilton: having finally 
made the commitment, it left no doubt it was going 
all-out. With an eight-acre site, one of the biggest in 
town, Hilton was determined to build on a grand 
scale — a huge, majestic entrance, ceilings thirty feet 
high, a 3,000-car self-park garage. Hilton described 


228 • TRUMP; TOE ART OP THE DEAL 


the project in its annual report as “the largest under- 
taking in our history.*’ With a casino of some 60,000 
square feet, and a 615-room hotel above it, the facility 
was comparable in size to Harrah’s at Thimp Plaza — 
which at the time was one of the largest in town. The 
difference was that Hilton’s master plan included a 
second-phase expansion, to some 100,000 feet of 
casino space, and more than 2,000 guest rooms. 

Hungry to start recouping its investment as soon as 
possible, Hilton began construction at the same time it 
filed for a gaming license. As 1 explained earlier, the risk 
of getting turned down for a license midway through 
construction was the reason I’d gone after licensing first. 
But everyone else had done it Hilton’s way, and I could 
understand Hilton’s confidence about licensing. 

For starters, it was already licensed in Nevada. In 
addition, at a time when virtually no cither construc- 
tion was going on in Atlantic City, Hilton was making 
a huge investment in a mostly undeveloped part of 
town. Perhaps most important, in a business scarcely 
known for attracting boy scout companies, the Hilton 
name was about as all-American as you could hope to 
find. The licensing process- seemed like little more 
than a formality for Hilton. 

The problem was that the Hilton people got a little 
too smug and foil of themselves. They assumed they 
were doing Atlantic City a favor by coming to town, 
when in fact die licensing authorities see it just the 
opposite way. The burden of demonstrating suitability 
for a license rests entirely with the applicant, no 


Wynn-Fall: The Battle for Hilton * 229 

matter who it is. Hilton took the view that it was 
entitled to a license. It was a critical mistake. 

I began to hear rumblings dial Hilton was in trouble 
early in 1985. Atlantic City is a very political town, and 
everyone who does business there knows that. Hilton, 
trying to be smart, hired a very political lawyer. On die 
face of it, that seemed like a savvy move. However, 
according to people I knew who were familiar with (he 
Hilton licensing hearings, it may have backfired. 

The second mistake Hilton made was ignoring the 
experience of previous applicants. Playboy, for exam- 
ple, had been turned down for a license three years 
before. The reason, at least in part, was its past 
associations with a lawyer named Sidney Korshak, 
who supposedly had a history of organized-crime con- 
nections. For ten years he’d also been on retainer to 
Hilton at $50,000 a year to help negotiate labor 
disputes. I have no idea whether Korshak is a good 
guy or a bad guy, but the only issue that matters is 
pleasing (he commissioners. They’d made it very clear 
that they didn’t like Korshak. Instead of quietly severing 
the tie, Hilton kept Korshak on his retainer right up 
until the Division of Canting Enforcement raised spe- 
cific objections to him in mid- 1984, 

Virtually the next day, Hilton fired Korshak. Barron 
later acknowledged to the commission that he’d taken 
the action only because "we know how strongly you 
people feel about the matter,” That was the worst 
thing he could have said. As one of the commissioners 
who voted against licensing Hilton put it later, ‘‘The 



230 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


corporation apparently didn’t get religion until it was 
pounding on the pearly gates of licensure.” 

It didn’t help when Barron later testified that Korshak 
had never interceded on Hilton’s behalf to prevent 
certain unions from striking Hilton's hotels. Within 
weeks of that testimony, Korshak wrote Barron a 
letter, which be released to the media. It described in 
great detail exactly the work he’d done for Hilton in 
Las Vegas. It also included copies of letters Barron 
Hilton had written thanking Korshak for his efforts. 
The end of Korshak 1 s letter was devastating. “You have 
caused me irreparable harm,” he wrote Barton, “and as 
long as I live I will never forget that. When did I become 
a shady character? I imagine when you were having 
difficulty getting a license in Atlantic City.” 

Hilton might have survived everything if Barron 
hims elf had taken the licensing hearings more serious- 
ly. Instead Ik virtually ignored them. One of the few 
times he saw fit to show up in New Jersey was for his 
own testimony before the Casino Control Commis- 
sion. Nor were any of his top corporate executives 
there for most of the hearings. 

On February 14, 1985, I was in my office when I 
got a phone call from a guy named A1 Glasgow, who 
publishes a newsletter about the gaining industry called 
Atlantic City Action. A1 is a true Damon Runyon 
character who lives and breathes gaming. He knows as 
much as anyone in town about who's doing what to 
whom. “Did you hear about Hilton?” A1 asked. I 
said, “No, what?” And he said, “They just got 
turned down for a license.” 


Wynn -Fall: The Battle for Hilton * 231 


I thought he was kidding at first. Approval requires 
the concurrence of four commissioners. Hilton won a 
majority, but as was the case with Hugh Heftier, 3-2 
in favor was a loss, not a win. In any case, A1 said he 
suspected there was a possibility Hilton might just 
decide to put the facility up for sale rather than try to 
fight for a rehearing. 

Hilton was scheduled to open the hotel in less than 
twelve weeks. They’d already hired more than a thou- 
sand employees, and they were adding at the rate of 
approximately a hundred people a day. By opening 
day, they’d have approximately four thousand people 
on the payroll. With that payroll and no income 
coming in, you’re talking catastrophe, no matter how 
big the company. At the very least, Hilton was under 
severe time pressure to get an appeal heard by the 
commission. Even so, I assumed that with more than 
$300 million already invested, they were going to do 
whatever they could to try to get licensed. 

After talking with Glasgow, and a few other people 
in Atlantic City, I decided to call Barron Hilton out in 
California. As much as anything else, it was a condo- 
lence call. You couldn’t help feeling sorry for the man. 
"Hi, Barron, how are you?” 1 said. Not surprisingly, 
Barron replied, “Not well, not well at all.” “I can 
imagine,” I went on, “because what happened is just 
too bad.” “I’ve got to tell you, Donald,” he said, “lhat 
I didn’t expert it, it caught me totally by surprise.” I told 
him that the move had caught everyone by surprise, and 
the conversation just went on like that. 

Before hanging up, I got to the business part of the 



232 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


call* "Look, Barron,” I said, “I have no idea what 
you want to do with this facility, but if for some 
reason you’re thinking of selling it. Yd be interested in 
buying it, if the price is right*” Barron said he’d keep 
that in mind, and he thanked me for calling. 1 think he 
genuinely appreciated it* I also figured that was as far 
as things would get. Hilton already had plans to file 
for a rehearing, and I still believed that the commis- 
sion would eventually reverse its decision* 

At the beginning of March 1 got a call from a Mend 
named Benjamin Lambert, who runs Eastdil Realty. 
I’d first met Lambert ten years before, when I was just 
beginning to look for a hotel-chain partner for the 
Commodore Hotel deal. He made some suggestions, 
and over the years, Ben and I worked on several deals 
together. We had our disagreements, but the bottom 
line was that we were friends. As it happened, Ben 
was a member of Hilton’s board of directors* In the 
weeks after Hilton was turned down for a license, we 
talked a few times about the situation. Ben believed 
Hilton ought to seriously consider selling* 

On this occasion, Ben was calling to inyite me to a 
party be was holding for the Hilton board at his 
townhouse, prior to their annual meeting that week in 
New York. As he put it, “It’s not an inopportune time 
for you and Barron to meet about current events.” 

The board, it turned put, was deeply split about how 
to handle the Atlantic City situation* The Casino 
Control Commission had just agreed to the rehearing 
Hilton had requested on licensing. Nonetheless, sever- 
al board members, including Ben, believed that it 


Wynn-Fall: The Battle for Hilton * 233 


made more sense to sell the facility immediately, if the 
right buyer could be found* Their argument was that if 
the commission didn’t reverse itself and grant Hilton a 
license, the consequences could be truly disastrous for 
the company* By that point, a couple of months down 
the line, they’d be carrying several thousand employ- 
ees, Worse, by selling the hotel under pressure, they 
might get a bad price. 

I went to the party, and Ben introduced me to 
Barron, whom I’d never met in person* We ended up 
walking out to the garden and talking alone together* 
Once again the conversation was nonspecific. Mostly, 
Barron vented his frustration about Atlantic City, while I 
listened sympathetically* Barron is wary and reserved 
by nature* He’s not the kind of guy who makes 
impulsive decisions, so I played it very low-key* We 
got along very well, and afterward I heard from Ben 
that Barron felt very comfortable with me. There are 
times when you have to be aggressive, but there are 
also times when your best strategy is to lie back. 

Very shortly after that, Steve Wynn of the Golden 
Nugget decided to make a full-scale assault on Hilton, 
seeking control of the company. It was probably the 
best thing that could have happened to me* If it hadn’t 
been for Wynn, I seriously doubt that Barron Hilton 
would ever have made a deal with me or anyone else 
for his Atlantic City hotel -casino. 

On April 14, Wynn wrote Barron a letter offering to 
buy a block of stock, amounting to 27 percent of the 
entire Hilton company, for $72 a share* At the time, 
the stock was trading for approximately $67 a share* 



234 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Wynn also said he was prepared, if his initial offer was 
accepted, to pay the same $72 per share to all Hilton 
shareholders. 

Ironically, Wynn could never have gone after the 
company at all if it hadn't been for Conrad Hilton. 
When Conrad died in 1979, he totally screwed Barron. 
There is no nicer way to say it. The assumption had 
been that Conrad would pass on his near-controlling 
interest in the company to Barron — or at the very least 
that he'd spread it among family members. 

Instead, Conrad Hilton used his will to disenfran- 
chise his children and grandchildren. At the time of 
his death, Conrad’s stock in Hilton was worth perhaps 
$500 million. But Conrad believed very strongly that 
inherited wealth destroys moral character and motiva- 
tion. I happen to agree that it often does. 

To roe, it makes sense to put money in trust for your 
children, so they don’t inherit millions of dollars when 
they turn twenty -one. But Conrad took that view to a 
ridiculous extreme. He left Barron a token number of 
shares of stock, and he left each of his grandchildren a 
piddling $10,000 each. Nearly all the rest of his wealth — 
specifically his 27 percent share of the Hilton Corporation — 
he left to the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation. He ordered 
most of the earnings from the stake to be used to support 
the charitable work of Catholic nuns in California. 

The result was to make Barron just another high-level 
corporate manager who lacked the power of a major 
stockholder. Even with the stock options that he exer- 
cised over ten years as chief executive, Barron still 
owned only a tiny percentage of the company by 1985. 


Wyim-Fall: The Battle for Hilton • 235 

What Barron did was to enter into litigation, seek- 
ing control of the foundation’s shares. His chances of 
winning the case, which had dragged on for years, 
were uncertain. For one thing, he had the sort of 
adversaries you want to avoid in a litigation: nuns and 
priests of the Catholic Church. 

Conrad’s will had specified that if for any reason 
the foundation was unable to accept his stock bequest, 
Barron had the right to purchase the stock at its market 
value as of 1979. Federal law prohibits charitable 
foundations and their affiliated parties from together 
owning more than 20 percent of a public company. 
Therefore, Barron could legitimately argue that he was 
entitled to purchase for himself the 7 percent of the 
foundation’s shares that were in excess of the founda- 
tion’s allowable 20 percent. 

But Barron tried to take his claim much further. 
Basically, he tried to argue that for byzantme legal 
reasons he was entitled to buy out the foundation’s 
entire stake. Moreover, by buying its stock for the 
1979 price of 24 % — at a time when fee stock was 
trading around 72 — in effect he’d be paying $170 
million for $500 million worth of stock. 

It’s called a great deal. It may also be called trying 
to rewrite your father’s will. My strong suspicion is 
feat Barron knew his chances of winning the litigation 
were questionable. More to the point, if he couldn’t 
get control of the stock, he was in a far weaker 
position to fend off Steve Wynn or any hostile take- 
over threat. Finally, so long as he held on to his Atlantic 



236 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Wynn-Fall: The Battle for Hiltoo * 237 


City facility but remained unlicensable, he was also 
highly vulnerable to shareholder lawsuits. 

I have no doubt how I would have reacted if I had 
been Barron Hilton. I would have fought Steve Wynn 
and his takeover threat, and I would also have fought 
for my license at the rehearing. I’m not saying l would 
also have won, but if I went down, it would have been 
kicking and screaming. I would have closed the hotel 
and let it rot. That’s just my makeup. I fight when I 
feel I’m getting screwed, even if it’s costly and diffi- 
cult and highly risky. 

But then, I wasn’t running a public company, so I 
didn't have to worry constantly about Wall Street and 
shareholders and the next quarterly-earnings report. 
The only person I had to please was myself. In the 
end, I think, Barron decided that he just wasn’t pre- 
pared to fight on two fronts at the same time — for 
licensing as well as for control of his company. And of 
the two, control of the company obviously came first. 

Steve Wynn helped me in two ways. By pursuing a 
takeover, he put Barron on the defensive and kept him 
from focusing on his relicensing hearings. At the same 
time, the more Wynn’s aggressive style offended Barron, 
the more likely it was that Barron would turn to me as 
a white knight. 

It’s not a role I'm accustomed to, but Wynn played 
right into my hand. Wynn grew up in his father’s 
bingo parlor, the son of a compulsive gambler. Later 
he made the right friends in Las Vegas, managed to 
buy a small stake in the Golden Nugget Hotel, and 
eventually took over. His entire world has been Las 


Vegas and Atlantic City and gaming. He’s got a great 
act. He’s a smooth talker, he’s perfectly manicured, 
and he’s invariably dressed to kill in $2,000 suits and 
$200 silk shirts. The problem with Wynn is that he 
tries too hard to look perfect and a lot of people are 
put off by him. Barron Hilton was one. 

It’s hard to imagine two people with more different 
styles. Barron is a member of what I call the Lucky 
Sperm Club. He was bom wealthy and bred to be an 
aristocrat, and he is one of those guys who never had 
to prove anything to anyone. He doesn’t try to impress 
with his style or his clothing or anything else. If Steve 
Wynn tries too hard, it might be said that Barron 
Hilton doesn’t try hard enough. 

Although Steve would probably never admit it. I’m 
convinced that he thought he was in a no-lose situation 
when he launched his takeover bid against Hilton. I 
believe Steve figured he’d end up buying Hilton’s 
Atlantic City hotel, and quite possibly at a favorable 
price. Many people thought that the hotel was all 
Steve really wanted. There was even a certain logic to 
it. Under siege from all sides, Barron could kill two 
birds with one stone by dealing with Steve. He could 
say, “Look, I’ll sell you my hotel if you’ll agree to 
give up trying to get control of my company.” 

But Steve Wynn underestimated how much he’d 
become anathema to Barron. That’s where 1 came in. 
One day after Wynn made his takeover bid, Barron 
Hilton became much more serious about negotiating 
with me- 

My first offer to Hilton was $250 million. As big a 



238 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 

number as that is, I knew Barron wasn’t going to sell 
for that price. He told me when we first met that he 
had $320 million invested in the facility. Selling out a! 
any price was a horrible prospect for him, but report- 
ing to shareholders that he’d taken a loss on the 
facility was out of the question. Within a couple of 
days, I raised my price to $320 million. There was no 
time to be cute, and no room to be tough in this 
negotiation. Either I bid the price, or I walked away. 

At die time $320 million — even $250 million — 
represented by far the biggest gamble I’d ever taken in 
my life. Just a year earlier, I’d completed construction 
on the Boardwalk facility for less than $220 million. 
In that case Holiday financed the entire deal and 
guaranteed me against operating losses. 

This time, the risk was entirely mine. 

As soon as I decided to bid $320 million, I called 
John Torell, a good friend who is president of Manu- 
facturers Hanover Thist. We’d already done a great 
deal of business together and on this occasion we had 
an amazingly short conversation. “John,” I said, “I’m 
calling because I have an opportunity to buy die incredi- 
ble Hilton facility in Atlantic City for three hundred and 
twenty million dollars. I’d like you to lend me the 
money, and I’m going to need it within a week.” John 
asked me a couple of questions and after two minutes he 
said, “We have a deal.” Just like that. It goes to show 
you the value of credibility. In return, I did something 
I’d never done before: I personally guaranteed die loan. 

It was a deal based almost entirely on my gut. I 
made my bid without ever walking through the hotel. 


Wynn -Fall: The Battle for Hilton * 239 

Several of my people had taken a look, and I’d gotten 
to know a lot about the construction from contractors 
who’d worked on the facility. However, I felt it 
wouldn’t be appropriate to show up myself in the 
middle of all the turmoil Hilton was going through. If 
I’d told my father the story, he would have said I’d 
lost my mind. I remember very well as a kid, accom- 
panying my father to inspect buildings he was consid- 
ering buying in Brooklyn. We might have been talking 
about a $100,000 or $200,000 purchase price, but our 
inspections were anything but casual. We’d spend hours 
in the building, checking every refrigerator and sink, 
looking over the boiler and the roof and the lobby. 

Nor would my father have been alone in his horror. 
In past situations, opinion about deals I was consider- 
ing had usually been split. In this case, nearly every- 
one I talked to opposed the deal. 

I was having enough trouble on the Boardwalk with 
Holiday Inns, they pointed out. I had no management 
for this huge new facility scheduled to open in two 
months. I’d have to take on huge financial risk person- 
ally. I had only a verbal commitment from Manny 
Hanny, and it wasn’t clear what conditions they might 
ultimately add when documents were drawn — or wheth- 
er they’d have second thoughts about the whole deal. 
There was even considerable doubt that the market 
could support another major facility, particularly one 
that would have to cany a huge debt service at a time 
when interest rates were still quite high. Why, every- 
one said to me, would I even consider this deal? 


240 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Wynn-Fall; The Battle for Hilton * 241 


For one reason only: I believed that, managed well, 
it had the potential to earn a ton of money. 

Once we agreed on a price, we still had a thousand 
other smaller points to negotiate before we could sign 
a forma! purchase-and-sale agreement. On April 14* 
1985, we sat down in Jeny Schrager’s offices at 101 
Park Avenue, with the lawyers from both sides, to get 
the deal done. 

Often, the easiest part of a deal is price. It’s all the 
other points— in this case, guarantees about construc- 
tion completion, responsibility for defects, size of 
deposit, allocation of expenses between contract and 
closing — that end up creating problems and killing 
deals* Hilton, from the very start, was taking a fairly 
hard line. Basically, they wanted to sell the hotel “as 
is,” so that when the contracts were signed, they 
could walk away from Atlantic City with no further 
obligations* Barron, by this time, was almost rabid in 
his hatred of New Jersey and particularly Atlantic 
City* The sooner he could put this nightmare behind 
him, the happier he’d be* 

The problem for me was that if 1 didn’t win some 
guarantees about completion of construction, I risked 
getting killed later on* Say, for example, that it turned 
out there was a major defect in the plumbing, or the 
air-conditioning system, and I was forced to rip it out. 
In a building this size, a major repair could easily run 
to many millions of dollars. 

Early on in the negotiations we seemed to be win- 
ning on the deal points that we cared about. But then, 
about midway through, the person in charge of Hilton’s 


negotiations — Gregory Dillon, the executive vice pres- 
ident of the company — got a call from Barron Hilton, 
who was back in San Francisco. When Dillon returned 
to the table, the whole tenor of the negotiation sudden- 
ly changed. I can’t say for certain, but it’s my strong 
suspicion that Barron had decided he wanted out of the 
deal, in all likelihood because he’d gotten a last- 
minute offer for more money* It’s even possible that 
the offer came from Steve Wynn and the Golden Nugget. 

In any case, Dillon and the Hilton lawyers suddenly 
began to raise questions about deal points that we’d 
agreed on* I’ve been in a lot of negotiations, and I 
sensed immediately that tfiey were trying to use these 
points as deal-breakers* If we couldn’t agree on comple- 
tion guarantees, for example, then they could walk away 
from the table without appearing to have welshed on the 
deal merely because they’d been offered a better price. 

We reached something of an impasse. Greg Dillon 
made a suggestion. “We’re not getting anywhere/ 1 he 
said, “so let’s break this up and we’U come back 
tomorrow and continue.” On the face of it, the sug- 
gestion made sense. It was early on Saturday morning. 
We’d been in the offices around-the-clock for nearly 
forty-eight hours and everyone was totally exhausted 
and nearly incoherent. But my fear was that if we put 
off the negotiations for a full day, the deal would never 
get done. As a compromise, I suggested we take a 
break for several hours and get back together about 
one in the afternoon* The Hilton people agreed, and 
we broke up* 

At that point my lawyers made one more attempt to 


242 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


convince me to let the deal die, gracefully. In particu- 
lar, Jerry Schruger was concerned about the financing. 
Even at that point, we didn’t have a formal, signed 
commitment letter from Manufacturers Hanover. But 
to me, a verbal commitment from John Toiell was as 
good as a signed commitment. Jerry’s point was that 
even if the commitment was firm, the guarantees I was 
being asked to make might make it hard for me to 
borrow money for other large deals. 

It was a very strange situation. As 1 sat in Jerry’s 
office, I wasn’t sure who was more eager to break up 
the deal: my lawyers or theirs. 

As it turned out, the Hilton team was more than two 
hours late in getting back, which only confirmed my 
suspicions. By the time they finally showed up, around 
three-thirty, I was i convinced that the only way I’d get 
the deal done was to shame them into doing it. I stood 
up and began my pitch. How could they shake my 
hand and then not stand by the commitment? How 
could they negotiate for three days and then walk 
away? How could they force me to spend hundreds of 
thousands of dollars on lawyers and not follow through? 
It was a disgrace, I said. It was immoral, it was 
wrong, it was dishonorable. 

My tone was more hurt than outraged or angry. I 
can be a screamer when I want to be, but in this case I 
felt screaming would only scare them off. Much of the 
deal had already been negotiated, and under the cir- 
cumstances, unless I gave Hilton a good excuse, it 
would be hard psychologically for them to walk away. 
It’s also possible, of course, that Hilton’s hard line 


Wynn-Fall: The Bittle for Hilton • 243 


was all a pose — a way of trying to ensure that they 
closed the deal with as few contingencies as possible. 

In the end, we reached a compromise. They would 
use their best efforts to ready the hotel for opening, 
and they'd agree to completion of a specific “punch 
list” of unfinished items. Also, they would allow me 
to hold back $5 million of the purchase price, subject 
to the facility’s being delivered complete and in first- 
class condition, as defined in specific terms in the 
contract. 

I assumed the construction was sound. If it turned 
out that l was wrong, and the defects I discovered 
ended up costing an additional $30 million, I believed 
Hilton would still be legally responsible. At 9:00 p.m. 
on April 27, 1985, we shook hands and signed a 
formal contract. I turned over a nonrefundable $20 
million deposit, and we set our closing for sixty days 
later. 

On May 1, I made my first visit to the facility I’d 
just purchased for $320 million. As soon as I walked 
in, I sensed I’d made a good decision. Much work 
remained to be done, but it was a spectacular-looking 
building. Immediately I began pushing all my people — 
very hard. Over the next six weeks we managed to 
accomplish what it had taken most other casinos as 
much as a year or more to do. We got our temporary 
certificate of occupancy, we finished the vast paperwork 
for our licensing, we hired 1 ,500 employees over and 
above those Hilton had hired, and we got the hotel and 
casino ready for opening. 

We also settled on the name Thimp’s Castle. My 



244 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Wynn-FaU; The Battle for Hilton * 245 


first choice had actually been Trump Palace, but then 
Caesars Palace filed for an injunction on the grounds 
that it had exclusive rights to the name Palace. I 
decided it just wasn’t worth a battle. We needed to get 
marketing and advertising campaigns under way, and 
the last thing I wanted was to be forced to make a 
name change after we’d already spent millions pro- 
moting Tump Palace. Ironically, no sooner did I 
announce my intention to call the facility Trump’s 
Castle than Holiday Inns filed their own suit to prevent 
me from using the name Trump at all on a competitive 
casino. Within weeks, however, the suit was thrown 
out. 

Even before we opened Trump’s Castle, I began 
discussions with several investment banking firms about 
floating a bond issue to replace my bank financing 
from Manufacturers Hanover. I wanted to take myself 
off the hook personally, even if it meant paying a 
higher interest rate to do so. The major problem with 
floating a bond issue was that Trump’s Castle had no 
performance record by which anyone could calculate 
how much debt it could reasonably handle. Also, the 
Trump Organization had no track record running a 
casino, since we’d yet to manage one ourselves. 

In short, anyone who bought Trump’s Castle bonds 
was making a leap of faith. They were betting that 
we’d make the facility highly successful from the 
start. That was the only way we could meet a debt 
service in the range of $40 million a year. To put that 
in context, there were several existing casinos in town 


that couldn’t come close to supporting that kind of 
debt service. 

Somewhat to my surprise, several investment bank- 
ing firms bid for the right to handle my offering. In 
return for a percentage of the total offering, they 
would guarantee to find buyers for the bonds at a 
specified price. Among the bidders was Drexel Burnham, 
which invented the concept of high-yield, junk-bond 
financing. But Bear Steams, with whom I’d already 
done a lot of business, offered to raise $300 million, 
or nearly 95 percent of die total I needed. Alan 
Greenberg, the chairman, and Paul Hallingby, manag- 
ing partner, were willing to bet big on me, and I liked 
that. 

lb attract buyers for a speculative offering like this 
one, you generally have to offer the inducement of a 
high yield. The bonds Bear Steams prepared carried 
about the same yield as other casinos had offered on 
their own financings, but those casinos had track 
records and offered far stronger guarantees to buyers. 

Bear Steams did a fabulous job — I got a good deal, 
but so did the buyers. Anyone who bought the bonds 
is earning an exceptionally good return and die bonds 
are now selling at a premium. 

The one thing I wanted to avoid above all was a 
repetition of the sort of problems we had from the 
beginning at the Boardwalk facility. Rather than hire 
an outside general manager, I decided to put my wife, 
Ivana, in charge. I’d studied Atlantic City long enough 
to be convinced that when it comes to running a 


246 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


casino, good management skills are as important as 
specific gaming experience. She proved me right. 

By closing the deal with Hilton on June 15, we 
were able to take advantage of the high summer 
season. The next day, we opened — without a hitch — as 
Thimp's Castle. People packed the casino and we did 
extraordinary business, way beyond our expectations. 
On our first day we earned gross gaming revenues of 
$728,000. For the slightly less than six months we 
were open during 1985, we grossed just over $131 
million. That was better than all but three of our 
competitors, and far better than the Boardwalk facility 
had done for the same period under Hurrah's. 

The one difficulty that arose in the early months had 
to do with the clause in my contract with Hilton 
regarding delivery of the hotel in first-class condition. 
Under the contract, $5 million of my purchase price 
was held back pending completion of all work. As 
time went on, however, we discovered that there were 
numerous outstanding problems — with the cooling tow- 
er, the sewage system, the computer system, and the 
fire alarm, among others. 

During the first six months we were open, my 
representatives and Hilton’s quietly negotiated about 
exactly which defects Hilton was responsible for and 
which they were not. My people felt strongly that the 
items not satisfactorily completed ran to considerably 
more than $5 million. On the other hand, I was eager 
to resolve the matter amicably. 

I liked Barron Hilton, I felt sorry about his experi- 
ence in Atlantic City, and for months 1 was the first to 


Wynn -Fall: The Battle ior Hilton • 247 


defend him in any conversation. As a result, when the 
argument over who owed money to whom seemed to 
be getting nowhere, I decided to call Barron myself, in 
January 1986. 

I got him on the phone and I said that since our 
disputes hadn’t been resolved, perhaps we should sit 
down together and work out some reasonable settle- 
ment. Barron seemed delighted that I had called. He 
said that he would be in New York the following 
Monday or Thesday and that he would call me then to 
set a date. 

Instead, when I came into my office on Monday 
morning I was served with a lawsuit from Hilton, 
seeking immediate payment of the $5 million the 
contract authorized us to hold back. I couldn’t believe 
it. 

The first thing I did was to call Barron again. “I 
don’t understand this,” I said. “I’ve just been served 
with a lawsuit, even though you told me we’d sit down 
and work this out together this week.” Barron totally 
stonewalled me. “I don’t know anything about a 
suit,” he said. He suggested that l cal! Greg Dillon, 
Hilton’s executive vice president. Incredibly, Dillon 
took the same position: that be knew nothing about the 
suit. Not for one minute did I believe that both Barron 
Hilton and his top deputy would be ignorant of a 
major lawsuit filed by the company. 

I recognize that lawsuits are sometimes inevitable, 
and I accept that as a reality of business. But when a 
person tells me he’s going to sit down with me, I 
expect him to honor that commitment. If we still can’t 



I 


248 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


resolve the situation, that’s another story. From that 
day on I stopped defending Barron Hilton to anyone.. 

1 also immediately ordered my attorneys to file a 
counterclaim. On April 2, 1986, we did precisely that, 
listing ninety 'four separate deficiencies in the Castle, 
along with our estimated cost of repair. The figure far 
exceeded the $5 million we’d been authorized to hold 
back. Both suits are still pending, and t believe that 
we’ll ultimately be upheld. 

But for that one sour note, the story of Trump’s 
Castle has been almost entirely a positive one. Much 
of the credit has to go to Ivana. No detail escapes her. 
She has systematically hired the best people in Atlantic 
City at all levels — from croupiers to hosts to her top 
executives. She oversaw the decoration of the hotel’s 
public spaces, which are now quite spectacular. The 
facility is always spotless, because she’s meticulous 
even about that. And great management pays off. In 
1986 we grossed $226 million, a record for first- year 
operations. We are projecting revenues of $310 mil- 
lion and a gross operating profit well in excess of $70 
million. 

It pays to trust your instincts. 


10 

LOW RENT, 
HIGH STAKES 

The Showdown 
on Central Park South 


S ometimes by losing a batde you find a new way 
to win the war. What you need, generally, is 
enough tune and a little luck. I had both at 100 
Central Park Smith. 

This is a story about a group of tenants who fought 
very hard to keep me from tearing down the building 
they lived in and constructing a new one in its place. 
They succeeded. But by delaying me for several years 
during which real estate values soared, and by forcing 
me to totally change my original plans, they inadvertently 
helped me come up with a less expensive and more 
profitable project. 


249 


250 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown an Central Park South * 251 


Ironically, die easiest part of the whole deal was 
buying the property. Early in 1981, Louise Sunshine, 
my executive vice president at the time, came in to say 
she’d heard there might be an opportunity to buy two 
adjoining buildings in a great location. The first was 
100 Central Park South, a fourteen-story residential 
building on the comer of Central Park South and 
Avenue of the Americas. The other was the Baibizon- 
Plaza, a thirty-nine- story hotel which fronted on Cen- 
tral Park and wrapped around behind 100 Central Park 
South, so that the east side of the hotel faced Avenue 
of the Americas. 

The buildings were owned by a syndicate that in- 
cluded Marshall Loeb of the Loeb banking family, the 
Lambert Brussels Corporation, and Henry Greenberg. 
By virtue of their location, the buildings represented 
one of the best pieces of real estate anywhere in the 
world. In addition to being on one of the city’s widest 
and most elegant streets, the buildings looked out over 
Central Park. 

The Barbizon-PIaza was a somewhat run-down middle- 
price hotel earning a modest profit at best. One hun- 
dred Central Park South was a building filled with 
rent-controlled and rent-stabilized apartments, mean- 
ing that the rent roll was barely sufficient to cover the 
operating costs of the building. 

Precisely because of these disadvantages, 1 was able 
to negotiate a very favorable purchase price. It helped 
that the properties hadn’t yet been put up for sale on 
the open market. As long as there were no other 


bidders, it was much easier for me to make a case that 
the buildings’ problems decreased their value. 

It probably also helped that the owners were a group 
of very wealthy men who had decided to sell not 
because they needed the money but because one of 
them was getting older and wanted to put his estate in 
order. I’m not permitted to say what I paid, but die 
sum wouldn’t be enough today to buy a vacant lot 
one-third the size in a far less desirable part of Manhattan. 

I barely looked at what the two buildings were 
earning. I was drawn to the real estate value, not the 
income. I was buying a great location at a modest 
price, and the way I looked at the deal, there was 
virtually no 1 downside. Almost immediately I was able 
to get a mortgage for the buildings, which covered my 
purchase price. In the worst case, I felt, I could 
always turn around and sell at a profit. Even in bad 
times, there are buyers for first-class locations. 

Another option was to do a modest renovation of 
the hotel and raise the rents on the ground-floor stores 
to market levels as their leases came up. In addition, 
as tenants in rent-controlled and rent-stabilized apart- 
ments passed away or moved out of 100 Central Parte 
South, I could raise the rents on those apartments. 
Even by doing these relatively minor things, I could 
earn at least a modest return on my investment. 

But then, “modest” isn’t my favorite word. The 
way to derive the most value from the site, I believed, 
was to knock down both buildings and to construct in 
their place one huge, beautiful modern luxury condo- 
minium tower. That posed two problems. The first, 



252 • TRUMP: 1HE ART OF THE DEAL 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown cn Centra] Park South * 253 


which I recognized from the start, is that it’s neither 
easy nor cheap to demolish a forty-four-story building 
such as the Barfaizon. Still, I was certain that the 
prices we’d be able to get for new apartments in such 
a premium location would more than justify any added 
demolition costs. 

The second problem, which I didn’t fully under- 
stand until much later, is that it’s almost impossible to 
legally vacate a building filled with rent-controlled and 
rent-stabilized apartments. I knew that some tenants 
were sure to resist moving, but 1 figured time was on 
my side. I could afford delay. 1 was prepared to be as 
patient — and as persistent — as I needed to be. 

What I underestimated was how much the tenants 
stood to lose. I soon came to understand a simple 
axiom: the lower the rent, the bigger the apartment, 
and the better the location, the harder people will fight 
to keep what they have. It’s no great hardship to 
consider moving if you’re living in a mediocre apart- 
ment in a marginal neighborhood. Likewise, if you’re 
paying market rent for a good apartment and you can 
find a comparable one at the same price, a small 
financial inducement will often prompt you to move. 

But at 100 Central Park South, many tenants were 
fighting to protect the ultimate in New York real 
estate: beautiful apartments with high ceilings, fire- 
places, and great views — at an unbeatable location. 
Most important, with rent control and rent stabiliza- 
tion, they were enjoying one of the great windfall 
subsidies in the free world. On the open market, their 
apartments would have rented for as much as ten times 


what they were paying. If I’d been a tenant at 100 
Central Park South, I’d have led the fight against 
anyone who tried to get me to move. 

Unfortunately, rent control is a disaster for all but 
the privileged minority who are protected by it. As 
much as any other single factor, rent control is respon- 
sible for the desperate housing crisis that has plagued 
New York City for the past twenty years. 

Like a lot of failed government programs, rent 
control grew out of a decent idea that ended up 
achieving exactly the opposite of its intended effect. 
Rent control began as a temporary federal policy in 
1943. The government froze rent on every apartment 
in America as a way to provide affordable housing for 
returning veterans. Having achieved that, the law was 
rescinded in 1948. But New York City adopted its own 
rent control law in 1962. Under the city statute, any 
dwelling built before 1947 was subject to rent control. 
In effect, the city created an inalienable right for five 
million New Yorkers — namely, low-price housing. 

It sounds wonderful. The only problem was that the 
city had no intention of underwriting it. Instead, they 
forced landlords to subsidize tenants. The costs of 
fuel, labor, and maintenance rose steadily, but the city 
refused to let landlords raise their rents to keep pace 
with inflation, much less the market itself. 

When landlords simply couldn’t make ends meet 
anymore, they began abandoning their buildings. Be- 
tween 1960 and 1976, approximately 300,000 housing 
units in New York were abandoned. The first apart- 
ments to go, either by abandonment or arson, were the 



254 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South * 255 


ones in the worst neighborhoods. Apartments in these 
buildings had the lowest rents. Landlords therefore 
earned the s mall est profit margins and were least able 
to absorb rising costs. The other victims were the poor 
tenants who had been living in these buildings. Whole 
neighborhoods in the South Bronx and Brooklyn turned 
into ghost towns. The city, in turn, lost hundreds of 
millions of dollars in real estate taxes that landlords 
stopped paying once they’d abandoned their buildings. 

Perhaps the worst thing about rent control is that it 
stopped protecting the people who needed it the most. 
The best rent-controlled apartments have always been 
prized and difficult to come by, and people with power 
and money have always had an inside track on them. 
During the past year, an independent researcher and 
writer, William Tlicker, has set out to document partic- 
ularly egregious examples. He cites buildings such as 
one on Central Park West at 73rd Street. Magnificently 
designed, it has huge apartments, wonderful detailing, 
a beautiful double-height marble lobby, and, of course, 
gorgeous views. It’s no surprise that people with 
money and taste would want to live there. Mia Farrow, 
for example, has ten rooms overlooking the park. She 
pays about $2,000 a month for an apartment that 
might rent for upward of $10,000 a month on the open 
market. Carly Simon, the singer and songwriter, lives 
in the same building and pays about $2,200 a month 
for her ten rooms overlooking the park. 

Down the street. Tucker found that Suzanne Farrell 
of the New York City Ballet has a fourteen-room 
duplex near Lincoln Center, for which she pays under 


$1,000 a month. William Vanden Heuvel, a very 
prominent attorney who served as ambassador to the 
United Nations under Jimmy Carter, pays less than 
$650 a month for a six-room apartment in a terrific 
building on East 72nd Street near Fifth Avenue. Alistair 
Cooke, the TV personality, pays about $1,100 for an 
eight-room apartment on Fifth Avenue. William Shawn, 
former editor of The New Yorker , lives in the same 
building and pays $1,000 a month for his eight rooms. 

The most notorious example of all may be Ed Koch, 
the mayor of New York. Koch has a very nice three- 
room rent-controlled apartment with a terrace in a 
beautiful part of Greenwich Village. He pays $350 a 
month — perhaps one fifth what it's worth. The worst 
thing, though, is that Koch doesn’t even live in his 
rent-controlled apartment. He lives in Gracie Mansion, 
the official residence of die mayor. 

Unlike most developers, I don’t advocate eliminat- 
ing rent control. I just think there ought to be a means 
test for anyone living in a rent-controlled apartment. 
People below a certain income would be permitted to 
keep their apartments at their current rent. People with 
incomes above a certain sum would be given a choice 
between paying a proportionally higher rent for their 
apartments or moving somewhere else. 

The situation at 100 Central Park South is a perfect 
illustration. Soon after I purchased the building, I did 
some research into the financial status of the tenants. 
What I discovered was fascinating but not surprising. 
There are three distinct groups. The first, who live in 
the largest apartments, overlooking the park, on the 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South * 257 


256 - TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


higher floors, are generally successful, wealthy, and in 
some cases quite prominent. 

Fashion designer Arnold Scaasi, for example, has a 
six-room duplex facing the park, for which he is 
paying $985 a month — about what it costs to rent a 
one-room studio at market rates. Angelo DeSapto, 
another wealthy tenant and an architect of some emi- 
nence, has the entire seventh floor facing the park- 
nine rooms for a rent of $1 ,600 a month. Still another 
tenant owns a beautiful brownstone on 63rd Street 
worth at least $5 million but also has four combined 
apartments at 100 Central Park South, with fabulous 
views of the park from the thirteenth floor and a rent 
under $2,500 a month. All of these apartments could 
rent for many times what the current wealthy occu- 
pants are paying. 

The second group of tenants are what Fd call the 
yuppies: younger professional people — stockbrokers 
and journalists and attorneys. While not necessarily 
millionaires, these people are certainly affluent. A 
good number of them occupy one- and two-bedroom 
apartments facing the park. 

The third group of tenants live in smaller apartments 
with tiny kitchens and windows facing the court. Not 
surprisingly, these people are generally of modest 
means. A number of them are elderly, living on social 
security. Their rents are below market, but not nearly 
to the degree of their wealthier neighbors in the front 
apartments. A comparable studio in the neighborhood 
might rent for twice what most of these tenants are 
now paying. 


The leader of the tenants, John Moore, was a man 
who didn’t quite fit into any group. In his early 
forties, this gentleman came from a family of money 
and social standing. His grandfather was a major 
stockholder in Tiffany & Company before it was 
bought by Walter Hoving, but he himself had not been 
very successful. Fve always been convinced that lead- 
ing the tenants gave him a way to feel useful and 
important. Of course, he also had something very 
valuable to protect: a beautiful two-bedroom park- 
view apartment for which he paid a very modest rent. 

Vacating the Barbizon-Plaza was easy. All I had to 
do was stop renting hotel rooms. Before I gave up that 
income, however, I wanted to vacate 100 Central Park 
South too. Unfortunately, I made a very critical mis- 
take right at the start: I should have gotten involved 
myself. That’s what Fd always done in the past, and 
that’s what always worked for me. But frankly, con- 
vincing tenants to move wasn’t the kind of work I 
relished. Instead, I decided to hire a company that 
specialized in relocating tenants. Citadel Management 
was recommended to me by several top executives at 
well-known companies who’d used the firm and vouched 
for its reputation. I wasn’t looking for tough guys. 
This was a high- visibility location, and a lot of people 
were gunning for Donald Trump already. The last 
thing 1 needed was to create controversy. 

My original plan was very straightforward. We’d let 
die tenants at 100 Central Park South know that we 
intended to eventually demolish the building, along 
with the Barbizon next door. Then we’d offer them 



2SB • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


help in finding suitable new apartments, as well as 
cash incentives to move. 

Very quickly, however, the tenants got organized. 
They formed a tenants’ association and decided to hire 
a law firm to represent them. Cost was no object. The 
wealthiest tenants had the most money to lose, and 
they were more than willing to underwrite any attor- 
ney fees. Several agreed to contribute as much as 
$8,000 a year to die cause. That was cheap, after all, 
compared with the $10,000 a month they might have 
to pay for a comparable apartment elsewhere. 

The firm that the tenants chose had been somewhat 
successful representing tenants facing eviction. They 
made a better living than most landlord attorneys. 
Their approach was to resist eviction on every front 
and tie things up in court for as long as possible, 
perhaps hoping to make as big a settlement as possible 
with the landlord, 

I felt confident that I had every legal right to vacate 
100 Central Park South for the purpose of building a 
new and larger building in its place. To evict the 
tenants who lived in non-rent-controlled apartments, 
all I had to show was my plans to demolish the 
building and put up a new one in its place. To evict 
the tenants under rent control, I had to meet stricter 
standards but none that seemed insurmountable. 

First, I had to demonstrate that my new building 
would provide at least 20 percent more housing units 
than the old one. That was easy enough, since it was 
obviously in my interest financially to put up a bigger 
building. Second, I had to prove that the old building 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South • 259 


was earning a profit, after expenses, of less than 8.5 
percent of its assessed value. By virtue of rent control, 
the assessment was a paltry $1.5 million, meaning the 
city got almost no taxes from the building. And 
although I wasn’t permitted to include my debt service 
as part of my expenses, the building still didn’t come 
close to earning an 8.5 percent margin. If my debt 
service was included. I was actually losing a substan- 
tial amount of money. Either way, if the city ruled 
purely on the merits, I was convinced they’d have to 
approve our demolition application and order any 
remaining tenants out. 

When Citadel took over management of the building 
early in 1981, I gave them two instructions: the first 
was to try to find new apartments for as many tenants 
as possible; the second was to continue to provide all 
essential services to the tenants. 

It happens to be very easy to vacate a building if, 
like so many landlords, you don’t mind being a bad 
guy. When these landlords buy buildings they intend 
to vacate, they use corporate names that are difficult to 
trace. Then they hire thugs to come in with sledge- 
hammers and smash up the boiler, rip out the stair- 
ways, and create floods by cutting holes in pipes. They 
import truckloads of junkies, prostitutes, and thieves 
and move them into vacant apartments to terrorize 
holdout tenants. 

That’s what I call harassment. I wouldn’t have done 
that sort of thing for moral reasons, nor would I have 
done it for practical reasons. I buy buildings in my 
own name, and I have a reputation to uphold. 


260 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The tenants at 100 Central Park South got an 
abundance of heat and plenty of hot water. I made sure 
to deal with the building’s outstanding violations, 
however modest, even though you’ll find dozens of 
violations in elegant buddings all over the Upper East 
Side. The last thing I wanted was to give these tenants 
legitimate grounds for opposing me. 

What 1 didn’t do was run 100 Central Park South as 
if it were a white-glove Park Avenue building. The 
rent roll, which barely covered my basic expenses, 
simply couldn’t support luxuries. Nor did tenants paying 
tiny below-market rents have any right to expect them. 
For example, when we took over, there was a tele- 
phone in the lobby— not a pay telephone but a free 
telephone. It was supposed to be for emergencies. It 
turned out that some tenants were using the phone to 
call their friends in Gstaad and St. Moritz. 

The doormen were taken out of their fancy uni- 
forms. That saved a small fortune in dry-cleaning 
bills. To ensure security, the doormen stopped leaving 
the door to meet tenants halfway down the street to 
carry their packages. High- wattage lights in the hall- 
ways were replaced with lower-wattage bulbs, be- 
cause, as any cost-conscious landlord will tell you, 
that alone saves many thousand dollars a year in 
electric bills. 

What we didn’t anticipate was that the tenants 
would try to use die fact that we were running the 
building more efficiendy as evidence that we were 
harassing them and making their lives intolerable. In a 
way it was fitting. We were talking about at least some 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South * 261 

people, after all, for whom hardship is not being able 
to get a table on thirty minutes’ notice at Le Cirque. If 
there’s one thing I’ve learned about the rich, it’s that 
they have a very low threshold for even the mildest 
discomfort. 

The tenants even figured out a way to turn our 
relocation offer into evidence of harassment. We were, 
they claimed, using "persistent and intense pressure” 
to get people to move. In reality, each tenant was 
approached with an offer of help in relocation. If our 
offer was turned down — which was usually the case, 
since the tenants had agreed to oppose us on everything — 
that was the end of it. Some tenants even told us that 
they had been warned by the tenants’ committee not to 
consider our offer. The irony is that we might well 
have been able to offer better alternatives to the tenants 
who lived in the less-desirable apartments. 

The one thing I can’t deny is that claiming harassment 
was a clever tactic. Harassment is a virtual buzzword 
in New York. It prompts instant images of vicious 
landlords and victimized tenants. If the tenants’ attor- 
ney could somehow convince a sympathetic jury — 
probably tenants themselves — that a harassment case 
had merit, we’d automatically be denied our demoli- 
tion application. The tenants of 100 Central Park 
South wouldn’t have to move. In the meantime, they 
could generate plenty of negative press about me 
merely by alleging that I was harassing them. The fact 
that I denied the charges would only make it a juicier 
story. 

Unfortunately, we made several moves that played 


262 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South * 263 


right into the tenants’ hands. For example, we decided 
to bring eviction proceedings against any tenant at 100 
Central Park South who was in significant arrears on 
his rent, or who wasn’t using the apartment as a 
primary residence, as required by law. Landlords all 
over the city bring these proceedings every day. They 
are perfectly legitimate, and we won in several instances. 

Stupidly, we also brought several cases that were 
flawed. In one, for example, we claimed that a tenant 
hadn’t paid his rent. It turned out he had his canceled 
check as evidence, and the payment simply hadn’t 
been recorded in Citadel’s books. When they realized 
the error, they told the tenant they’d drop the action if 
he produced the check. By then, however, the tenants’ 
lawyer saw a perfect opportunity to further demon- 
strate their case. The tenant refused to produce the 
check, and obviously we lost this case in court. In 
another situation, we failed to give a tenant sufficient 
legal notice of an impending eviction proceeding. Our 
case was legitimate, but the court ruled that we should 
have known the law had been changed recently to 
require longer notice. 

Another mistake was tinning- up the windows of 
vacant apartments. It happens to be exactly what the 
city does with its own vacant apartments all over the 
city to protect them from vandalism. But then the city 
doesn’t own buildings on Central Park South. It would 
have been smarter — and it would have saved us a lot 
of trouble — if we’d come up with a nicer way to deal 
with the windows from the start. 

Nothing generated as much controversy as my offer 


to provide housing for the homeless at 100 Central 
Park South. By the summer of 1982 — about a yew 
after I took over the building — the problem of the 
homeless in New York was beginning to get a lot of 
attention. One morning, after passing several homeless 
people sleeping on benches in Central Park, I got an 
idea, 

I had more than a dozen vacant apartments at 100 
Central Park South. Because I still planned to demol- 
ish the building, I had no intention of filling the 
apartments with permanent tenants. Why not, I thought, 
offer them to the city for use by the homeless, on a 
temporary basis? I’m not going to pretend that it 
bothered me to imagine the very wealthy tenants of 
100 Central Park South having to live alongside people 
less fortunate than themselves for a while. At the same 
time, I genuinely felt it was a shame not to make use 
of a few vacant apartments when the streets were filled 
with homeless people. 

Almost immediately, the columnists and editorial 
writers criticized my offer. City officials, sensing a 
potential controversy, told me “No, thanks.” It didn’t 
help make my offer seem sincere when one columnist 
wrote a story saying that I’d refused a subsequent plea 
by a group representing Polish refugees seeking to use 
the apartments. In fact, by then I’d had second thoughts 
about the whole concept. My attorneys had researched 
the situation and determined that if ] permitted anyone 
to move into the apartments — even on a temporary 
basis— I’d have a very hard time ever getting them out 
legally. That was all I needed. 


264 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Saying so publicly, however, might just have made a 
bad situation worse. Instead, I said nothing, which 
wasn't much better. It was not one of my best experi- 
ences with the media, but it taught me something. You 
don't act on an impulse — even a charitable one — unless 
you've considered the downside. 

Early in 1984, a group of tenants went to the state 
and officially filed charges of harassment. Virtually all 
of the complaints were trivial, but I told my people to 
take care of every one nonetheless. Even that wasn’t 
enough. In January 1985, the state agreed to consider 
the tenants 1 charges of harassment. Obviously, we'd 
made our share of mistakes early on, but none had 
caused anyone real hardship. In tny view, the tenants’ 
tactics were a clever form of reverse harassment. They 
knew there had been no real harassment. The case 
instead was a ploy to hold on to their bargain apartments — 
or at the very least to exact a rich settlement from me. 

The tenants’ committee orchestrated the campaign. 
Nearly fifty tenants were part of the harassment ac- 
tion, and all of them submitted identical boilerplate 
lists of complaints. They even ended their letters with 
the same phrase; “Donald Trump is a modern-day 
Scrooge." When my attorneys did a little further 
checking, they found out something very interesting. 
Several of the wealthier tenants had been submitting 
the same sort of complaints to city agencies for the past 
ten, twenty, and even thirty years, invariably accom- 
panied by a request for a reduction in rent. The tenants 
of 100 Central Park South were world experts in the 
art of living very high for very little. 


Law Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South * 26S 


What the tenants didn’t count on is that I’m not one 
of those landlords who roll over to avoid bad publicity 
or save a few bucks — particularly when I think the 
charges are unfair. Fighting back might run up my 
legal bills and even make me rethink my strategy. But 
the one thing I wasn’t about to do was allow myself to 
be blackmailed into a ridiculous settlement. 

A couple of things did go my way. The most 
important was the value of New York real estate. It 
had risen steadily every year since 1974, but in early 
1981, about the time 1 bought the two buildings on 
Central Park South, it finally took a pause. Over the 
next two years, during which I’d originally hoped to 
get my new building finished, the market actually 
declined. A lot of people thought the big boom was 
over. 

In 1984, however, the market picked up again strong- 
ly. The economics were staggering. In the fall of 
1981, the average price per room for a cooperative 
reached as high as $93,000. By early 1983, it dropped 
as low as $67,000. But by January 1985 — when my 
confrontation with the tenants was reaching a head — 
the average price per room had jumped up to $124,000. 
In short, while the tenants were doing all they could to 
delay me. New York real estate was nearly doubling in 
value. 

Even by building only on the Barbizon site — which 
Fd decided was the easiest solution— Fd earn more 
than if Fd developed the entire site two years earlier. 
In addition, we now had numerous vacant apartments 
at 100 Central Park South, and with time the number 


266 • TRUMP; THE ART OP THE DEAL 


could only rise. The taw permitted us to rent some 
vacant apartments at market rates. In effect, I was 
sitting on gold. 

The other thing that happened during this period is 
that architectural tastes and trends began to shift. At 
the time I purchased the buildings on Central Park 
South, the style in skyscrapers was still very much the 
sleek, highly modem glass tower. Trump Tower was 
perhaps the ultimate example. Because that design was 
so well received and so successful, it seemed to me 
only logical to design a similarly sleek modem build- 
ing on the Central Park South site. 

By 1984, however, I sensed a new wave in architec- 
ture was setting in — and it was the wave of the old. 
The people who buy top-line apartments in New York 
tend to be extremely fashion-conscious, in architecture 
as in everything else. I’m a practical man. If an older 
look is what people want, that’s what I’m going to 
provide. I’m not interested in buildings that don’t sell. 
Early in 1985, I commissioned an architect to design a 
new building for the Barbi 2 on-Plaza site — but one that 
incorporated older, classical elements compatible with 
100 Central Park South. 

In truth, my heart wasn’t totally in it. I’d never been 
a big fan of postmodernism, the architectural move- 
ment that first mixed classical elements with modem 
design. To me, it often represents the worst of both 
worlds. The materials and the craftsmanship are rarely 
first-class because most builders won’t pay what that 
requires, and the classical elements in postmodern 
designs almost always look imitative. At the same 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on C entral Rule South • 267 

time, these elements interfere with the sleek look of 
the best modem design. 

When my architect showed up with his model for an 
older-looking building on the Barbizon site, the design 
was not the first thing that caught my eye. The new 
building, I noticed, was much smaller than the one it 
was intended to replace. What, I asked the architect, 
was this all about? 

“It’s the zoning,” he explained. “When the Barbizon 
was built, there were no restrictions on size. Now that 
the zoning is so much stricter, it’s no longer permissi- 
ble to build such a large building on that site." 

“Do you mean,” I stud, “that if I totally gut and 
rebuild the inside, and leave only the facade and the 
steel frame intact, that is okay? But if I tear down the 
old building I have to replace it with a much smaller 
and less dramatic new one? M 

And he said, “Yes, Mr, Thunp, that is correct/* 

“If that’s the case,” I said, “then why should we 
knock down an old building to build a new one that 
will be less than half the size, won't look nearly as 
good as the old one, and will cost a lot more?” 

It s simple, Mr. Thunp,” be said. “The reason is 
that the windows in the Barbizon are much too small 
for a luxury residential building.” 

The solution was obvious: leave the building intact, 
but cut out bigger openings and enlarge the windows. 

Coincidentally, my own tastes were changing. 1 was 
beginning to appreciate the detailing and elegance of 
certain great older buildings. Among them were die 
two buildings I owned on Central Park South. I also 


268 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


began to realize how much a part of the Central Park 
South skyline these buildings were. 

Our preliminary estimate for ripping down the 
Barbizon and putting up a new structure in its place 
was $250 million. When we costed out the job of 
gutting and rebuilding the interior and enlarging all the 
windows, we came up with an estimate of $100 
million for the entire job. The cost of trying to 
replicate my favorite feature of the Barbizon — the 
magnificent stone crown at its top — was $10 million 
alone. Even at that, it would never have matched the 
original. Renovating wasn’t only cost effective, it was 
also a better design decision. 

One last factor helped turn the whole deal around. 
For several years. I’d been trying to purchase the St. 
Moritz Hotel, directly across the street from 100 
Central Park South. The sellers were Harry Helmsley 
and Lawrence Wien, two of the greatest real estate 
men ever. The problem had always been cost. They 
wanted a huge price for the hotel, which I believed 
was more than its earnings justified. Several times 
they made deals with other buyers, presumably for 
what they were seeking, only to have the agreements 
unravel before closing. Time and again I’ve seen that 
happen with people who offer a top price for a proper- 
ty. Their eyes prove bigger than their pocketbooks, 
and they end up backing out. 

After watching this process repeat itself several 
times, I called Hany Helmsley and said, “I’d very 
much like to buy the St. Moritz, and in my case you 
know the deal will go through, but I don’t want to pay 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Cental Fhik South • 269 

the price you have in mind.” And he said, “Well, 
what you’re offering is too low.” We negotiated back 
and forth, and finally we settled on a price that I think 
was fair, based on the hotel’s earnings. 

But I had an ace in the hole: the 1,400-room 
Barbizon-Plaza one door up the street. I hadn’t told 
anyone, but my plan was to close down the Barbizon 
as soon as I purchased the St. Moritz. The logic was 
simple. When I closed the Barbizon, I could move 
Charles Frowenfeld, a great hotel manager, and all of 
his best people over to the St. Moritz. In addition, 
many of the Barbizon ’s customers would inevitably 
follow, since the St. Moritz was the only other moderate- 
price hotel on Central Park South. While I’d obviously 
lose some customers when I closed down the Barbizon, 
I’d pick up a lot of them at the St. Moritz. At the very 
least, I figured, occupancy and revenues at the St. 
Moritz would increase by 25 percent virtually over night 

The banks apparently agreed. When I went seeking 
financing for the purchase, I was able to get an 
immediate commitment for $6 million more than my 
purchase {nice. In short, I was able to buy the St. 
Moritz without putting up any money at all — and I 
ended up with $6 million to put in my pocket. When 
we got to closing, Harry Helmsley was leafing through 
the papers and he noticed the size of my mortgage. He 
didn’t look thrilled. But the sale was also a great deal 
for Harry and Larry. After all, they’d paid practically 
notiling to purchase the hotel years earlier. 

I took over the St. Moritz in September 1985 and 
closed the Barbizon soon after. During the first year. 


270 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


business at the St. Moritz increased by 31 percent, or 
slightly more than I’d predicted. But by virtue of more 
efficient management, die margin of profit nearly 
quadrupled. 

The one remaining issue I faced was the harassment 
suit at 100 Central Park South. Because I no longer 
intended to vacate and raze the building, a harassment 
finding no longer threatened my plans. Still, several of 
my lawyers urged me to settle the case purely to 
resolve an unpleasant situation. Specifically, they 
suggested I work out a deal under which the tenants 
would drop their harassment suit in return for my 
selling them the building outright for $10 million. 

On its face, the deal wasn’t a bad one for me. Based 
on ray original purchase price, I stood to earn a very 
substantial profit by selling 100 Central Park South for 
$10 million. But in the end I said no. Temperamentally, 
I just couldn’t accept the idea that the tenants were 
using harassment charges as a lever against me so that 
they could buy a building for less than market value. 
This is where the tenants and their lawyers caused 
themselves the loss of a tremendous windfall. Today in 
New York almost everyone wants to buy their apartments. 

Meanwhile the harassment case stalled in the courts. 
A state supreme court judge ruled in August 1985 that 
there was no clear evidence that harassment had oc- 
curred. In December 1986, the appellate division of 
the state supreme court unanimously upheld the lower 
court’s ruling. 

The lawyers kept talking settlement. Finally, late in 
1986, nearly all the tenants agreed to drop any further 


Low Rent, High Stakes: Showdown on Central Park South • 271 

claims against me. Since I no longer planned to 
demolish the building anyway, I agreed to drop all 
eviction proceedings and to give them new leases on 
their apartments, I also agreed to excuse from three 
months’ rent every tenant who was party to the agree- 
ment, and in return, all tenants who’d been withhold- 
ing rent — in some cases for as long as a year — agreed 
to pay up. The total figure exceeded $150,000. 

While the state dropped its case, the city insisted 
that it intended to continue pursuing foe harassment 
case against me. Even John Moore, the leader of foe 
tenants’ group, was surprised. For foe city to push foe 
case, he said to a reporter, “is like beating foe horse 
after foe horse has come back to the bam. 1 ' The real 
victims were the taxpayers. The city was choosing to 
spend money and manpower on a nonissue that had 
been resolved — at a time when many important issues 
had not. It is my opinion that this case continues 
purely because I beat foe hell out of Ed Koch on foe 
Trump Tower tax abatement and embarrassed him with 
Wollman Rink. 

In foe meantime, I renamed the Barbizon-Piaza 
Trump Parc, and began my renovation. One of foe first 
things I did was to hire a company called Holes, Inc. 
Talk about surreal specialization. These people did 
nothing but cut holes for a living. Fortunately, they did 
it very well. In a matter of weeks, they’d turned the 
Barbizon s tiny windows into huge picture-window 
openings. Those openings alone were immensely valu- 
able, because a great view is worth a small fortune. 

In a market about to be flooded with new buildings, 



272 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 




we had something unique to offer: the best of the old 
and the new. The detail and ornamentation of the 
building’s exterior remained, including the crown. So 
did features such as the twelve-foot ceilings in the 
apartments, which no developer would even consider 
in a new building, because the cost is simply too 
great. At the same time, the new construction gave the 
building several advantages over most older ones: new 
plumbing, smooth walls, modem wiring, fast elevators — 
and, of course, huge Thermopane windows. 

The building is scheduled to be completed in the fall 
of 1987, but we put the apartments on the market in 
November 1986. Within eight months, we’d sold 80 
percent — nearly 270 apartments. One individual bought 
seven apartments, for a total of $20 million. When the 
building sells out — in all likelihood before a single 
person has moved in — we’ll have grossed in excess of 
$240 million. And that’s before I do anything with 
100 Central Park South and the stores along the street. 

All's well that ends well. The tenants at 100 Central 
Park South kept their apartments, Central Park South 
retained two of its landmark buildings, and the city 
will soon be earning far greater taxes from the proper- 
ty than ever before. As for me. I’ll ultimately earn a 
profit of more than $100 million on a deal that many 
people thought would turn out to be a total loser. And 
it was largely because the tenants managed to delay 
me. 


11 

LONG SHOT 

The Spring and Fall 
of the USFL 


A ll my life I’ve believed in paying for the 
best. But when it came to the United States 
Football League, I decided to go a different 
route entirely. 

By the time l bought the New Jersey Generals in the 
fail of 1983, the league was already failing badly. It 
had lost nearly $30 million. The Generals alone, under 
the ownership of an Oklahoma oilman named J. Walter 
Duncan, had lost more than $2 million, not to mention 
nearly every game they’d played. In real estate terms, 
I was buying the South Bronx instead of Fifth Avenue 
and 57th Street. 


273 


274 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


But I didn’t look at the Generals as a typical deal. I 
viewed it instead as a long shot, a lark that 1 could 
afford to take. I’ve always been a football fan. I love 
sports, and having my own team seemed the realiza- 
tion of a great fantasy. I also liked the idea of taking 
on the NFL, a smug, self-satisfied monopoly that I 
believed was highly vulnerable to an aggressive 
competitor. 

As long shots go, I liked the odds on the USFL. My 
initial investment was relatively small, and the poten- 
tial rewards were quite great. For less than $6 million, 
contingent on the league’s continuing — compared with 
the $70 million an NFL franchise might cost — -I was 
able to purchase a professional football team in one of 
the greatest areas in the world. If I could help turn the 
team and the league around, I stood to earn back many 
times my initial investment. At the very least, I would 
have a lot of fun trying. 

The main problems with the USFL seemed fairly 
clear-cut and not all that difficult to remedy. The first 
was that the league was playing its games in the spring. 
Sports have their seasons, and fans like their football 
in the fall. The television networks, which essentially 
underwrite professional sports, won’t pay large sums 
for the rights to televise spring football. At the time I 
bought the Generals, ABC was paying $1 million a 
year for exclusive network rights to the USFL spring 
schedule. Meanwhile, the three networks together were 
paying a staggering $359 million a year for rights to 
the NFL fall games. The first thing the USFL had to 
do was move to the fall. 


Long Shot: The Spring and pall of the USFL • 275 

The second challenge was to build a first-class 
product. To me, that meant spending whatever money 
it took to sign top players, promote our teams, and 
create the sort of excitement that would make us a 
legitimate competitor for the NFL’s fans and TV dollars. 

Two leagues had been launched previously in com- 
petition with the NFL, and the outcome in each case 
was highly instructive. The American Football League 
was formed in 1962 by eight very wealthy entrepreneurial 
men. They signed top players and absorbed substantial 
losses in the service of building the league’s credibility 
during the early years. By 1966, the AFL had signed 
away dozens of the NFL’s best players and was widely 
seen as the more exciting of the two leagues. With the 
AFL raids escalating, NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle 
surrendered. He suggested a merger of the two leagues, 
and today those original AFL teams are among the 
NFL’s most successful franchises. But even without a 
merger, the AFL would have prospered. 

The other venture that tried to compete with the 
NFL was the World Football League. It was launched 
in 1973, but by men of much less wealth and more 
limited vision. In contrast to their AFL counterparts, 
the WFL owners signed very few name players, placed 
their franchises in smaller cities, and failed to attract 
any kind of television contract. Within two years, the 
WFL was bankrupt. Its founders didn’t lose a fortune— 
but only because they didn’t invest a fortune. 

I foresaw two possible outcomes if we moved the 
USFL to the fall and began to build quality teams, and 
both of them were potentially good. The first was that 


276 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


at least one of the three networks would offer us a 
substantial fall television contract, which would lielp 
us continue to build an even stronger league fully 
competitive with the NFL. The second was that the 
three networks, all fearful of alienating the monopoly 
NFL, would refuse to give us a fall television contract, 
no matter how strong a product we had to offer. In that 
case, I believed, we’d have strong grounds for an 
antitrust case against the NFL. 

If we went the latter route, obviously we could lose, 
and then our league would be dead. But 1 believed the 
more likely outcome was some sort of victory. If the 
suit went to a jury and we were awarded reasonable 
damages — particularly given the fact that any damage 
award is trebled in an antitrust case — we’d have the 
financial base we needed. Another possibility was that 
the NFL, anticipating a costly and humiliating court 
defeat, would offer some sort of settlement, much as 
they’d done twenty years earlier with the AFL. 

I made no secret of my views. Two years later, the 
NFL would try to claim in court that my plan to move 
our league’s season to the fall was somehow secret and 
sinister. In fact, within days of taking over the Gener- 
als, I told any reporter who called me exactly how I 
felt. Then, on October 18, 1983, a month after pur- 
chasing the Generals, I attended my first owners 
meeting in Houston, Texas. I wasn’t shy there, either. 

When my turn came to address my fellow owners, I 
stood up and explained that I hadn’t bought into the 
USFL to be a minor-league owner playing in the 
off-season of spring. I pointed out that the greatest 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall of the USFL * 277 


number of fans, and by far the biggest pool of network 
television dollars, were concentrated in die fall. I 
reminded my fellow owners that because the NFL had 
just gone through a long, bitter players’ strike the past 
fall, many fans were feeling restless and alienated. 
And finally, I argued that we had a chance to put the 
NFL even further on the defensive by moving aggres- 
sively to sign top NFL players whose contracts were 
coming up, as well as the best graduating college 
players. 

If there was a single key miscalculation I made with 
the USFL, it was evaluating the strength of my fellow 
owners. In any partnership, you’re only as strong as 
your weakest link. Several of my fellow USFL owners 
were strong as hell financially and psychologically. 
Among them were Michigan Panthers owner A1 
Taubman and Philadelphia Stars owner Myles Tanen- 
baum, both of whom, coincidentally, had made their 
personal fortunes building shopping centers, as well as 
Memphis Showboats owner Billy Dunavaut and Jack- 
sonville Bulls owner Fred Bullard. 

Unfortunately, I quickly discovered that a number of 
USFL owners lacked the financial resources and the 
competitive vision to build the sort of top-quality 
league necessary to defeat the NFL. They shuddered at 
fire prospect of any direct confrontation with the NFL, 
they were quite content to play in obscurity in the 
spring, and they spent much more time thinking about 
ways to keep their costs down than about how to build 
the league up. 

My most immediate priority was the team I’d just 


278 - TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


purchased. The New Jersey Generals were a disaster. 
They’d just come off a season in which they’d won only 
four games and lost fourteen. The team had one great 
athlete and superstar, Herschel Walker* the Heisman 
Trophy running back from Georgia, but even Herschel 
had yet to play near his potential. Meanwhile, although 
the Generals had just completed a full season of playing 
professional football across the river from the media 
capital of the world, they had attracted virtually no press 
attention and very few fans. 

The best way to turn that around was to turn the 
Generals around. Fans like winners. They come to 
watch stars — great,, exciting players who do great, 
exciting things, Herschel was obviously one, but in 
football, the team rises or falls on the quarterback. 
Nothing helped promote the AFL — and the New York 
Jets — as much as the signing of a University of Ala- 
bama quarterback named Joe Namath, for a then- 
unprecedented $400,000 a year, Namath eventually 
led the Jets and the AFL to their first Superbowl 
victory. But even before that, he earned his salary 
simply because he became the AFUs most colorful, 
charismatic drawing card. 

The first player I went after was Brian Sipe, the 
quarterback for the Cleveland Browns. Sipe had been 
the NFLs most valuable player a couple of seasons 
earlier* and he was a bona fide superstar. He was also 
in the option year of his contract, meaning that he’d be 
available in a matter of months. Getting Sipe was a 
chance to help the Generals and the USFL and 
simultaneously to hurt the NFL- The negotiations 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall of the USFL * 279 


proved to be long and difficult, but on December 27, 
1983, I held a press conference to announce we’d 
signed Sipe to a long-tenu $800 r 000-a-year contract 
with the Generals. 

By the time we got Sipe, we’d already lured away 
several other top NFL players. The first was Gary 
Barbara, an All-Pro free safety from the Kansas City 
Chiefs, whom we signed on November 5. Signing 
Barbara had a side benefit: it showed other NFL 
players that we were serious about paying top dollar to 
build a top team. On November 28 we signed Kerry 
Justin, who’d been a starting comerback for the Seattle 
Seahawks. In December we signed a pair of lineback- 
ers from the Super Bowl-champion San Francisco 
Forty-niners, Willie Harper and Bobby Leopold. To 
protect Sipe, we signed a veteran offensive guard from 
Cincinnati named Dave Lapham. 

Another negotiation that got some attention during 
that period was the one I conducted with Don Shula, 
coach of the Miami Dolphins. Shula was one of the 
most successful coaches in NFL history, but he was 
also vastly underpaid. I immediately offered Shula far 
more than he’d been earning. I was willing to meet 
most of his demands, but when he threw in a request 
for an apartment in Trump Tower, I drew the line. I 
can afford to buy football teams in part because 1 don’t 
give away apartments. Still, the negotiation ended up 
helping Shula: it forced the Dolphins to renegotiate his 
contract at a far higher salary, which he certainly 
deserved. 

We got the most attention of all for signing Lawrence 


280 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall of the USFL • 281 


Taylor, the All-Pro linebacker for the New York Giants 
and perhaps the best all-around player in the NFL, On 
December 31, J983, we announced that Taylor had 
signed a four- year contract with the Generals, for a 
total of $3,25 million. The catch was that it wouldn't 
take effect until 1988, when his contract with the 
Giants expired. In a way, that was even better than 
getting him immediately. By signing a player of Taylor’s 
stature to a “futures” contract, we were serving notice 
on the NFL that none of their players — not even those 
under multiyear contracts — were beyond our reach. 

As it turned out, when Taylor’s deal was announced 
the Giants went nuts. Two weeks later, on January 17, 
1984, they offered him a six-year $6.55 million exten- 
sion of his contract. In effect, 1 forced the Giants to 
increase Taylor’s salary by $3 million just to prevent 
him from departing three years down the road. Then, 
in return for my letting Taylor out of his Generals 
contract, the Giants agreed to pay me a penalty fee of 
$750,000, 

My aggressiveness in signing NFL players also 
seemed to inspire other USFL owners. The second 
USFL draft was held on January 4, 1984, The Pitts- 
burgh franchise drafted Heisman TYophy-winner Mike 
Rozier from Nebraska and signed him five days later. 
The team’s season-ticket sales immediately jumped 
from 6,000 to 20,000. Brigham Young quarterback 
Steve Young, a college superstar, signed a multimillion- 
dollar contract with the USFL’s Los Angeles Express. 
Don Klosterman, the president of the LA Express, also 
managed to sign fourteen other draft picks, every one 


of whom was a good NFL prospect. Altogether, USFL 
teams signed nearly half of the top college players we 
went after. Sports Illustrated posed the obvious ques- 
tion in an article about the success of our draft: “How 
many more players like Rozier and Young can the 
NFL afford to lose?" 

When our owners met in New Orleans on January 
17, I pushed again to move our season to the fall. 
Given our success in luring NFL players and signing 
top college prospects, the time couldn’t have been 
better. I suggested a fall vote right then and there, 
but the reluctant owners managed to vote through a 
compromise instead: appointing a long-range plan- 
ning committee to study the spring-fall question. To 
me, committees are what insecure people create in 
order to put off making hard decisions. But at least 
Vd gotten the fall question on the table as a serious 
issue. I was made a member of the new committee 
and 1 was confident I’d ultimately persuade a majori- 
ty of owners that the fall was our best hope. 

Meanwhile, the NFL was beginning to run scared 
The best evidence was a meeting the league held in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, in February 1984 to dis- 
cuss its future — and specifically the threat of the 
USFL. The main seminar — which we didn’t learn 
about until much later— was conducted by a highly 
respected Harvard Business School professor named 
Michael Porter, who had prepared a forty-seven-page 
document entitled “The USFL vs. the NFL.” Some 
sixty-five NFL executives attended his presentation, 
among them Jack Donian, executive director of the 


282 - TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall of the USFL • 283 


NFL management council, as well as numerous team 
owners. 

Porter bluntly outlined a multipart plan for declaring 
total war on our league, by employing numerous anti- 
competitive strategies. His two-and-a-half-hour pre- 
sentation was divided into sections such as ‘ ‘Offensive 
Strategies,” “Guerrilla Warfare” and “The Art of 
War — China 500 b.c.” Porter’s suggestions included 
trying to “dissuade” ABC from continuing even its 
spring television contract with the USFL; encouraging 
USFL players to unionize in order to drive up our 
costs; and attempting to co-opt the most powerful and 
influential USFL owners by offering them NFL 
franchises. 

As we launched our second season in the spiring of 
1984, we weren’t yet aware of the NFL’s secret cam- 
paign to destroy us, but we were probably feeling its 
effects. Several of our more vulnerable owners — most 
particularly those in Chicago, Washington, San Antonio, 
and Oklahoma — had begun to experience severe finan- 
cial problems. The danger to the league was less 
losing a couple of franchises than having our credibili- 
ty damaged. As long as we had problems, it was 
difficult to get the press to focus on our stronger 
teams. Instead, sportswriters wrote about declining 
attendance in the weaker cities, and die personal 
financial problems some owners were having. 

Meanwhile, as I feared, the long-range-planning 
study dragged on. A majority of owners had voted to 
hire an outside consultant, McKinsey and Company, to 
conduct the study. McKinsey is probably die best in its 


business, but I like consultants even less than I like 
committees. When it comes to making a smart deci- 
sion, the most distinguished planning committee work- 
ing with the highest-priced consult ants doesn’t hold a 
candle to a group of guys with a reasonable amount of 
common sense and their own money on the line. 

McKinsey’s study took three months and cost a 
princely $600,000. Finally, on the morning of August 
22, 1984, McKinsey executive Sharon Patrick presented 
her conclusions to the USFL owners, who had gathered 
in Chicago. The league’s best hope, she told us, was 
to continue to play in the spring, to limit expenditures 
severely, and perhaps to consider a move to the fall 
somewhere down the line. Among other things, she 
reported that a majority of fans who’d been surveyed 
in a poll wanted the USFL to stay in the spring. You 
can probably guess bow much stock I put in polls. 

The reality was that we just couldn't afford to adopt 
the McKinsey conclusions. Even if we cut our losses 
in the spring, there was no foreseeable chance of 
making a profit, and a lot of our weaker owners 
couldn’t afford to lose another dime. We needed to 
take radical action — and that’s what I stood up and 
said. Within two hours of Patrick’s presentation, 1 
managed to get the issue of moving to the fall put to a 
vote. It passed by more than the required two-thirds 
majority. That same afternoon we announced the deci- 
sion, to take effect following one last spring season. 

The other thing we began to discuss at the meeting 
was bringing an antitrust suit against the NFL. Specifi- 
cally, we authorized our commissioner, Chet Simmons, 



284 * TRUMP- THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Lang Shat; The Spring and MI at the USFL * 285 


to send NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle a letter put- 
ting the NFL on notice. Simmons stated our views 
gently: “The position of the USFL as a new sports 
enterprise, and the market position of the NFL, make 
it essential to the survival of the USFL that the NFL 
and the NFL owners operate within the bounds of the 
laws and regulations which govern the conduct of a 
business having a dominant market position.” Put 
more bluntly, our message was this: If you try to hurt 
us, we’ll sue you. 

By October, it was clear that something had changed 
dramatically in the tenor of our discussions with CBS 
and NBC. So long as we were just considering a move 
to the fall, both networks seemed interested in discussing 
a deal. No sooner did we announce our move, howev- 
er, than they both backed off totally. It was obvious to 
me that the NFL was putting enormous pressure on the 
networks not to do business with us in the fall — 
particularly on ABC, with whom we already had a 
contract for the spring. 

Pete Rozelle later testified that he’d never even 
discussed the issue with Roone Ariedge, the head of 
ABC Sports. To me, that was preposterous. Rozelle 
and Ariedge are longtime colleagues and good friends. 
Would anyone seriously believe that Rozelle, highly 
concerned about the implications of the USFL’s move 
to the fall, wouldn’t make his views known to his 
friend Ariedge? And is it really possible that Ariedge, 
a man who made millions of dollars for ABC by 
inventing NFL Monday Night Football, wouldn't be 
highly concerned with keeping Rozelle happy? 


The irony is that all three networks — not just ABC 
but NBC and CBS as well — were actually losing 
money on NFL games. After total rights fees in excess 
of $350 million a year, the networks, by their own 
estimates, lost many millions televising games during 
1985. 

Even so, no network wanted to risk alienating the 
NFL. Football is the prestige TV sport, and in order to 
remain competitive with one another, the three net- 
works were resigned to carrying the NFL as a loss 
leader. As for the USFL, we were left with no option. 
On October 17, 1984, we filed an antitrust suit in the 
southern district court of New York. Specifically, we 
asked that the NFL be limited to contracts with no 
more than two of the networks, and that we be 
awarded damages of $1.32 billion. 

In the meantime, we had a more immediate prob- 
lem: staying alive. 

On January 3, 1985, tbe USFL held its third draft of 
college seniors. While the Generals had improved 
greatly, to 9-5, and averaged more than 40,000 fans a 
game, other teams were falling mote deeply into the 
red. We very much needed a shot in the arm. 

My own solution was to go after the best and most 
exciting college senior. There was little doubt who that 
was. Doug Flutie of Boston College was a lock to win 
the Heisman Tfophy. In his final game, playing against 
the University of Miami on national television, Flutie 
capped his career by throwing a last-second fifty-yard 
bomb for a touchdown, giving Boston College a 47-45 
victory. Very quickly, tbe pass became one of those 



2S6 - TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


instant-replay classics, transforming Flutie into an over- 
night sports legend. 1 must have seen the pass at least 
two dozen times on various newscasts and sports 
shows, 

I also liked the fact that Flutie had great media 
potential. He was good-looking, well-spoken, and gutsy— 
the sort of guy the press loves to write about. There 
were two minor problems. One was that the Generals 
already had a very talented quarterback named Brian 
Sipe. The other was that Doug Flutie stood just five 
feet ten and weighed only 170 pounds. A number of 
scouts were skeptical that he could make it in the pros, 
where virtually every defensive lineman is six feet six 
and weighs at least 260 pounds. 

In the end, I went with my instincts. Brian Sipe was 
a proven star, but he was also thirty-five years old, 
and his best years were probably behind him . Doug 
Flutie, on the other hand, had the potential to became 
the USFUs Joe Namath. In the worst case, he’d 
generate a lot of press, which would help the Generals’ 
season-ticket sales and the image of the league gener- 
ally In the best case, he’d be a great player, too. 

On February 5 f we signed Flutie to a five-year 
contract at over $1 million a year — which I personally 
guaranteed. I don't like to do that, but a player of 
Flutters stature wasn’t about to risk signing with a 
financially shaky league unless he had some guaran- 
tees. If the league ever did go under, I figured, I could 
sell his contract to an NFL team. 

On February 6, I solved the issue of Brian Sipe by 
trading him to the Jacksonville Bulls. I wasn’t about to 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall of the USFL • 2M7 


have a very highly paid quarterback sitting on the 
bench. 

Flutie made his debut on February 24, in an away 
game against the Birmingham Stallions. He started 
slow but came on very strong and almost pulled out a 
victory by leading the Generals to three touchdowns in 
the fourth quarter. As for his box-office value, it was 
even greater than I expected. The game was televised 
by ABC and drew a 9 rating — nearly twice what we’d 
averaged the previous season. 

Two other notable events occurred that first week- 
end of the season, both having to do with quarter- 
backs. One was the opening-game performance of a 
quarterback named Jim Kelly of the Houston Gam- 
blers. Kelly threw for 574 yards and five touchdowns, 
proving that he was as good as any quarterback in 
either league. Unfortunately, the other quarterback 
news was not good. Brian Sipe, playing his first game 
for Jacksonville, suffered a separated shoulder, which 
seemed almost certain to end his season — and perhaps 
his career. 

On March 10, we had our home opener against the 
L.A. Express. If I had to pick a high point for tbe 
USFL, it was probably that game. Over 60,000 fans 
turned up, anticipating a duel between the newcomer 
Flutie and the USFL’s best proven quarterback, Steve 
Young. Both players put on dazzling shows, and better 
yet, the Generals came out on top. Flutie threw for 
two fourth-quarter touchdowns, to give us the victory 
35-24. 

The day after Flutie’ s great game, I wrote a letter to 


288 • TRUMP; THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Harry Usher, our new commissioner, suggesting that 
the cost of Flutie’s contract be shared among all USFL 
owners — on die grounds that Flutie’ s promotional val- 
ue was leaguewide. I knew it was highly unlikely that 
the other owners would go along— and they didn’t — 
but ray attitude is that you can't get hurt asking. 

Flutie, Kelly, and Young represented the good news 
about the USFL. The bad news was that we were still 
stuck with a lot of weak teams led by mediocre 
quarterbacks. 

My worst fears about the consequences of having 
weak partners came true midway through our 1985 
season. John Bassett was the owner of the USFL 
franchise in Tampa Bay. Previously he’d been one of 
the founders of the ill-fated World Football League. 
From the very start, Bassett and 1 had been on oppo- 
site sides of nearly every issue — and specifically the 
move to the fall. I’d managed to bring the majority of 
my fellow owners over to my way of thinking, but 
Bassett never stopped fighting me, though he finally, 
reluctantly, did vote with the majority. Despite our 
disagreements, I liked him personally, and I felt sym- 
pathetic to his situation. On this Sunday afternoon in 
late March, it was widely known within the league 
that Bassett had cancer, that he was lighting for his 
life, and that his behavior had become increasingly 
unpredictable during the previous few months. 

What I’ll never know is whether Bassett’s illness 
affected his judgment that day. In any case, Bassett 
agreed to be interviewed by ABC announcer Keith 
Jackson, who began by asking what he thought was 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall of the USFL • 289 


wrong with the USFL. What followed was a tirade. 
Before a national TV audience, Bassett viciously criti- 
cized the concept of moving the USFL to the fall. He 
called the league its own worst enemy. He said the 
USFL was guilty of mismanagement and virtually 
every other horrible sin he could conjure up. I caught 
the interview on a TV monitor in the press box, and I 
couldn’t believe what I was hearing. My first thought 
was that Bassett would make a great witness for the 
NFL in our antitrust suit. My second thought was that 
he was just a terribly frustrated man, thoughtlessly 
venting anger. 

If any one person had the potential to offset the 
damage wrought by Bassett and our other weaker 
owners, it was probably Harvey Myerson, the attorney 
we hired in the middle of 1985 to take over our 
antitrust case. Myerson was the head of the litigation 
department at the firm Finley Kumble, and he was an 
expert in antitrust litigation. He also had the sort of 
pugnacious, confrontational attitude you need when 
you’re the underdog taking on the establishment. Most 
of the other USFL owners had long since written off 
the possibility that we’d win the antitrust suit- The 
NFL, they believed, was just too entrenched. But from 
the first time Myerson met us in April 1985, he told us 
he felt we had a very strong case. He said that we 
should pull out all the stops to bring it to trial, and that 
there was a better-than-even chance we’d win. 

In the meantime, one bright spot amidst all the 
USFL’s troubles was the fact that the Generals — and 
specifically Herschel Walker — were playing so well. 



290 * TRUMP. THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Long Shot; The Spring and Fall vA the USFL * 291 


For the first two weeks of the season Herschel simply 
wasn’t being utilized. He’d call me up in my office, 
depressed, and say, “Mr. Trump, I can run over these 
guys, if they’d just give me the ball.” I ranted and 
raved to our coach, Walt Michaels, hut it wasn’t until I 
literally threatened to fire him that he got the point. In 
the seventh game of the season, Herschel was finally 
let loose. He ran the ball thirty times for almost 250 
yards, setting a league record. In each of the next ten 
games, he ran for more than 100 yards. By the end of 
the season he’d racked up 2,41 1 yards. That broke the 
all-time professional football rushing record, held 
previously by Eric Dickerson of the NFL. I got a great 
kick out of that. 

Unfortunately, Doug Rutie was injured late in the 
1985 season, and that almost certainly cost us the 
USFL championship. In the playoffs, we lost by three 
points to the transplanted Baltimore Stars, while Rutie 
stood on the sidelines. 

In February 1986 we agreed to reduce the number 
of USFL teams from fourteen to eight. In the process, 
we weeded out the owners with the biggest financial 
problems. We also consolidated our strengths. The 
Houston Gamblers, for example, merged with my 
Generals, As a result, we created a dream backfield that 
I’m convinced had no equal in professional football: 
Herschel Walker at running back and Jim Kelly at 
quarterback. The other teams that survived the consol- 
idation were also all among our strongest and most 
popular Memphis, Baltimore, Jacksonville, Tampa, 
Orlando, Arizona, and Birmingham. 


In April we got more good news when a federal 
judge named Peter Leisure set a jury trial to begin the 
next month in our antitrust suit against the NFL. That 
ensured us a verdict before the start of our first fall 
season. If we won the suit, we'd be in great shape to 
launch. If we lost, 1 considered it highly unlikely that 
the USFL could survive — but at least we’d finally be 
able to cut our losses. 

The future of the USFL now rested in the hands of 
the six jurors chosen to hear our case. 

The jury system is designed to ensure the fairest 
possible trial. The problem is that a pool of randomly 
selected jurors isn’t necessarily qualified to make judg- 
ments on complicated issues. Sometimes that isn’t 
bad, particularly if you have a case that’s weak and a 
lawyer who is very persuasive. The problem is unpre- 
dictability. You can have a great case and come out a 
loser, and you can have a terrible case but come out a 
winner. 

We got to present our side first, and very quickly, a 
consensus formed in the courtroom that Harvey Myerson 
was beating the living daylights out of the NFL. He 
put Commissioner Pete Rozelle on the stand and al- 
most literally took him apart For twenty-six years, 
Rozelle had been running the NFL very successfully 
and very smoothly. Of course, you don’t have to be a 
genius to run a monopoly. Put that same man up 
against a tough competitor, and it may be a whole 
different story. 

Myerson pressed, and Rozelle got flustered. He 
mumbled, stumbled, and spoke badly, he turned red. 




292 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


and he took back statements. At times he appeared to 
be flat-out lying. Halfway through his week of cross- 
examination, Rozelle had become physically sick. His 
performance was so weak that I found myself actually 
feeling Sony for him. In retrospect, however, I realize 
that the jury probably felt at least as sorry for Rozelle 
as 1 did, and that may well have helped save the NFL’s 
case. 

Rozelle was least credible, I thought, when he 
talked about the Harvard seminar entitled “The USFL 
vs. the NFL” — the linchpin of our case. Rozelle 
claimed he hadn’t known anything about the seminar, 
and that he got “physically ill” when he first heard 
about it, weeks after the fact. 

“To your stomach, sir?” asked Harvey Myerson, 
totally deadpan. 

"Yes,” said Rozelle. 

“I see,” said Myerson, “How long did it take you 
to recover?" 

“About half a day,” Rozelle replied. 1 doubt that a 
single person in the courtroom believed Rozelle during 
that exchange. 

At another point, Myerson introduced some devastat- 
ing^ incriminating comments that Rozelle had made 
before a congressional committee, back in 1961. At 
the time, the NFL’s games were being shown on just 
one network, CBS. “If all the networks were tied up 
by one football league,” a senator asked Rozelle 
during his testimony, “wouldn’t the other league pos- 
sibly be at a major competitive disadvantage?” 

“I should certainly t hink so,” Rozelle said, quickly 


Long Shot: The Spring and Pall of the USFL • 293 


adding, “There is no intention on our part of using 
more than one network.” By 1987, of course, the 
NFL had all three networks tied up. Didn’t that put 
our league at a major competitive disadvantage? Ro- 
zelle could only hem and haw. 

The one time I myself directly contradicted Rozelle’s 
testimony was over his description of a meeting the 
two of us had in March 1984. At the time, the USFL 
owners were still debating whether to move to the fall. 
The Porter seminar at Harvard had taken place several 
weeks earlier, and one of Porter’s main strategies for 
destroying the USFL had been to try to co-opt the 
strongest USFL franchise owners by promising us 
NFL franchises. 

At Rozelle’s suggestion, I rented a suite at the 
Pierre Hotel for a meeting on March 1 2. I like to keep 
every option open in life, and I was certainly interest- 
ed in what the commissioner of the NFL had cm his 
mind. Rozelle testified at the trial that during our 
meeting I told him I was interested in purchasing an 
NFL franchise, and that I’d get out of the USFL if I 
could get into the NFL. It was ridiculous on the face 
of it. I never had any interest in owning a football 
franchise outside of the New York area, and I had long 
since determined that neither of the two New York- 
based NFL teams — the Giants or the Jets — was up for 
sale. 

What really happened at the meeting is that Rozelle 
tried to woo me, plain and simple. He said he consid- 
ered me a good candidate for an NFL franchise, 
whether it was the Generals, through merger, or an 


294 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fail of the USFL - 295 


NFL team, which he said he could help me get. In 
return, he said, he wanted two things; that the USFL 
not move to the fall, and that the league not bring an 
antitrust suit against the NFL. 

I had no doubt about what Rozelle was up to. He 
was testing the waters. If he could get rid of the USFL 
merely by absorbing a couple of our teams into the 
NFL, he was prepared to do that, Vm certain. At the 
same time, by merely dangling an offer he gave 
himself deniability, in the event that I turned him 
down. That’s exactly what I did- Sure enough, he 
rewrote the story of our meeting. 

We called eighteen witnesses in all during the first 
month of the trial, and we scored a lot of points. 
Myerson showed how the NFL had bullied the three 
networks into refusing to consider giving the USFL a 
TV contract. He showed why the USFL could not 
survive without such a contract. He offered endless 
evidence — led by the Porter study — that the NFL had 
consciously and illegally set out to destroy the USFL. 

By the time we'd finished presenting our witnesses, 
even the press was beginning to sense the possibility 
that we might win the case. The headline of a story in 
Sports Illustrated caught the mood best, give the first 
bound to the usH., it said, followed by an even more 
devastating subhead: “The embattled younger league 
has scored tellingly against the NFL in the trial of its 
$1.32 billion antitrust suit. Now the NFL has the 
ball/* 

Looking back, I think our strength may have back- 
fired, just as the NFL's weakness ended up prompting 


the jury’s sympathy. Myerson’s style— the silk hand- 
kerchief in the pocket of his perfectly tailored suit* his 
theatrical way of speaking, the methodical relentlessness 
of his attack— may have come off as too aggressive 
and too slick. By contrast, I think, the NFL came off 
as the beleaguered underdogs. Like Rozelle, who 
became sick and was so unconvincing during his 
cross-examination, the NFL lawyer, Frank Rothman, 
was so weak and ashen-faced the last days of the trial 
that everyone, including me, felt very bad for him. 
Many didn’t even believe he would be able to finish, 
and in fact he was rushed to a hospital for a major 
operation shortly after the trial’s conclusion. 1 believe 
Rothman’s troubles elicited further sympathy from the 
jury. 

I was part of the problem. As a witness, I was well 
spoken and professional, I think — very much a con- 
trast to Pete Rozelle, But that probably played into the 
NFUs hands. From day one, the NFL painted me as a 
vicious, greedy. Machiavellian billionaire, intent only 
on serving my selfish ends at everyone else’s expense. 
“The USFL/* attorney Frank Rothman told the jury in 
his opening remarks, “is controlled and dominated by 
Donald Thimp, who can buy and sell many of the 
owners in the NFL.” 

In truth, of course, the wealthy, powerful NFL 
owners cowered only to the extent that it served their 
ends. In retrospect, we might have been better off to 
put on the witness stand several of the smaller USFL 
owners who’d lost their shirts and had genuinely sad 
stories to tell* 



'T 


196 * TRUMP: TOP ART OF THE DEAL 


The other way the NFL beat us was in pure public 
relations. I’ve got to give this to Rozelle: he’s always 
been great at promoting his league. His chief spokes- 
man is a guy named Joe Brown, and Rozelle deserves 
credit for using him well. After each day's testimony, 
Brown would go to the halls and lobby the press 
masterfully, telling them what a great day it had just 
been for the NFL, It drove me crazy. I’d say to Harry 
Usher, our commissioner, “Why aren’t you out lobby- 
ing the press?” And he’d say, “It isn’t important. It’s 
the jury we’ve got to convince,” 

Unfortunately, that’s not the way it works. Although 
the jury is instructed not to read any newspaper cover- 
age or watch any television reports about the trial, it’s 
nearly impossible to resist reading about a case you’re 
part of, particularly one that’s getting massive atten- 
tion. Even if some jurors did resist, they undoubtedly 
heard about the trial coverage from their friends and 
family. Why else, after all, would Rozelle assign Joe 
Brown to lobby reporters every day for six weeks? 

For all that, when the jury finally began delibera- 
tions on July 25, 1986, I was convinced we’d made 
the more effective case, and that they’d find in our 
favor. 

What I never anticipated was that we could win — 
and end up losing anyway. After four days of delibera- 
tion, the six -member jury concluded on July 29 that 
the NFL had violated antitrust laws by conspiring to 
monopolize professional football, and that they did 
illegally damage the USFL. But then they voted to 
award us only a token one dollar in damages. It was a 


Long Shot: The Spring and Fall ol the USFL • 297 


hollow victory. Without damages, the decision had no 
teeth, since the NFL didn’t get punished for breaking 
the law. 

When the jurors were interviewed by reporters im- 
mediately after the verdict was announced, it turned 
out that they’d been deeply divided. At least two of 
them had wanted to award us substantial damages. 
One, a schoolteacher named Miriam Sanchez, had 
favored giving us damages of $300 million but said 
that she’d misunderstood the mechanism far doing so, 
“I didn’t understand the instructions,” she told report- 
ers, “so I had to put my faith in the judge, hoping he 
would give the USFL more money.” 

I wasn’t happy about the outcome, but in a way I 
was relieved. My attitude is that you do your best, and 
if it doesn’t work, you move on to the next thing. By 
the time the trial took place, I had lost quite a lot of 
money on the Generals— and the USFL had lost many 
times my number. Without the prospect of a fall 
network television contract, there wasn’t any point in 
investing more money. 

Most of my fellow owners agreed. One week after 
the decision, the USFL owners met and voted to 
suspend the season. At the same time we voted to 
appeal the jury’s ruling. Unfortunately, the fans come 
out the biggest losers. The NFL’s monopoly power is 
secure again, and the owners have less reason than 
ever to consider adding new teams in cities that have 
long been seeking franchises. 

Meanwhile the best USFL players have been picked 
up by NFL teams. Herschel Walker was signed by the 



198 * TRUMP. THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Long Shot; The Spring and Fall of the USFL • 299 


Dallas Cowboys. Because I’d personally guaranteed 
Walker’s contract, he could have collected $1.2 mil- 
lion from me for each of the next six years and never 
played football. But Herschel's a competitor, and the 
money was secondary. 

As it turned out, I made a very good deal with 
Dallas. They could have refused to pay for his big 
contract. But figuring that Dallas was under intense 
fan pressure to sign Herschel, I told them I was 
interested in letting Herschel go only if they picked up 
the Ml cost of his contract. Sure enough, they agreed. 
It was good for me, it was good for Herschel, and it’s 
even turned out to be good for Dallas. Herschel joined 
the team in August, and although he had virtually no 
time to practice, he finished the season as the Cow- 
boy’s leading combined rushing and receiving yardage 
gainer. 

Jim Kelly also immediately became a star as quar- 
terback for the Buffalo Bills. Freddie Gilbert, one of 
our defensive lineman, went to Atlanta and established 
himself as one of the team’s best players. Even Doug 
Flutie, who everyone said was too small for the NFL, 
was signed by the Chicago Bears. Dozens of USFL 
players were signed to NFL contracts and many have 
become stars on their new teams. 

Watching players like Herschel Walker and Jim 
Kelly play in the NFL does sometimes make me wish 
our league could have survived. I’m convinced that if 
the USFL had played last season, the Generals would 
have fielded one of the best teams in professional 
football. 


Not that I’ve ever given up entirely. I’m a big 
believer in comebacks, and the USFL is appealing this 
ridiculous verdict. In recent months. I’ve received 
numerous calls from a very smart, very persistent guy 
who is trying to put together an entirely new fall 
league. He wants me to take the New York franchise — 
and I’m seriously considering it. 




12 

ICE CAPADES 

Rebuilding 
Wollman Rink 


I never bad a master plan. I just got fed up one 
day and decided to do something about it. 

On the morning of May 22, 1986, there was a 
story on the front page of the New York Times saying 
that New York City officials had decided to start all 
over in their effort to rebuild the Wollman Skating 
Rink in Central Park. If everything went well, said the 
city, the rink would be ready to reopen in approxi- 
mately two years. 

I couldn’t believe it. 

First of all, there was no reason to believe anything 
would go well, much less everything. The Wollman 

301 



302 - TRUMP. THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wollman Rink * 303 


Rink, built in 1950, had first closed for renovations in 
June 1980. The work was scheduled to take two and a 
half years. Even that seemed like a long time to 
rebuild an ice-skating rink. 

Coincidentally, in June 1980, I broke ground for 
Trump Tower, a sixty-eight-story skyscraper with six 
floors of shopping, thousands of square feet of office 
space, and 263 residential apartments. Two and a half 
years later we completed Trump Tower, on time and 
on budget. 

From my new apartment, I had a view of Wollman 
Rink. It was not a pretty sight. Although millions of 
dollars had already been spent on its renovation, it was 
obvious, even from a distance, that the rink was 
nowhere near finished. 

Three more years passed, millions more dollars 
were spent, and things just got worse. So bad, in fact, 
that on this May morning in 1986 the city felt com* 
pelled to announce it was starting the whole process 
over from scratch. 

I knew absolutely nothing about building ice-skating 
rinks, but I did know something about construction. If 
it took me two and a half years to put up a major 
skyscraper, surely it was possible to build a $2 million 
ice-skating rink in a matter of months. Two years 
earlier, when the job was already a disaster, I*d called 
Henry Stem, commissioner of parks, and offered to 
take over construction from die city, for no fee. He 
turned me down. Now, after reading about this latest 
debacle, I called Henry again and repeated my offer. 


He had the same response. “No, thanks,” he said. 
“We can do it ourselves/* 

“That’s ©neat, Henry,” I said, “except that you told 
me the same thing two years ago and look what 
happened/* I decided to write a very strongly worded 
letter to Ed Koch, the mayor of New York. I was 
appalled by the city’s incompetence. I genuinely felt I 
could get the job done, and I believed the rink was 
something hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers — 
including my own children — had a right to enjoy. 
Whatever anyone may think, my motive was that 
simple. 

“Dear Ed,” my letter began. “For many years I 
have watched with amazement as New York City 
repeatedly failed on its promises to complete and open 
the Wollman Skating Rink. Building the rink, which 
essentially involves the pouring of a concrete slab over 
coolant piping, should take no more than four months’ 
time. To hear that, after six years, it will now take 
another two years, is unacceptable to all the thousands 
of people who are waiting to skate once again at the 
Wollman Rink. I and all other New Yorkers are tired 
of watching the catastrophe of Wollman Rink. The 
incompetence displayed on this simple construction 
project must be considered one of the great embarrass- 
ments of your administration. I fear that in two years 
there will be no skating at the Wollman Rink, with the 
genera] public being the losers.” 

Then I got to the real point: 

“I am offering to construct and pay for a brand-new 
Wollman Ice-Skating Rink and have it open to the 



30* * TRUMP; THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Ice Capades; Rebuilding WolLrim* Rink * 305 


public by November of this winter I would lease the 
rink from the city at a fair market rental, and run it 
properly after its completion.” 

J sent the letter to Ed Koch on May 28, 1986. He 
wrote me a response by return mail- Somewhat to my 
surprise, he belittled my offer. The city wasn't about 
to let me operate the rink, he said, but they’d be 
delighted if Pd donate the $3 million to rebuild it and 
supervise the construction. He made a few more sar- 
castic comments and ended by saying, 4 ‘With bated 
breath I await your response.” 

The tone of the mayor's letter irritated me. Fortunately, 
I wasn't the only one who was put off by it, and I have 
Koch himself to thank for that. I hadn’t released my 
letter to the press because I didn't want to be accused 
of grandstanding. Koch, however, decided to release 
his letter. Apparently, he figured that if he made fun of 
my offer publicly. I'd just quietly slink away. 

He totally underestimated the press reaction. First, 
the press thrives on confrontation. They also love 
stories about extremes, whether they're great successes 
or terrible failures. This story had it all. Perhaps most 
important, many reporters tend to see themselves as 
consumer advocates. Almost nothing gets them as 
outraged as a boondoggle that victimizes average citi- 
zens. The city’s fiasco at the Wollman Rink was m 
absolute classic. 

Even I was surprised at how totally the press took 
my side. Obviously, that doesn’t always happen. But 
this time, within three days, there were dozens of 


articles and editorials attacking Koch for his reaction 
to my offer. 

“The Koch administration,” said the Daily News in 
an editorial, “is hemming and hawing over Donald 
Trump's offer to rebuild and operate Wollman Rink in 
Central Park. Why? The offer is genuine, with no 
apparent strings attached. Koch should grab it and 
heave a sigh of relief that a long-running, costly 
disaster is off his hands. So far the Mayor has raised a 
lot of phony objections. . . . Maybe the problem [is 
that] Koch & Co. are embarrassed that they've squan- 
dered $12 million on Wollman/’ 

“Trump is offering to take over the Wollman proj- 
ect, to rebuild the rink, and to have it open by 
November at no cost to the city,” wrote the New York 
Post. “After the whole 13-year multimillion-dollar 
debacle, you would think that they’d be jumping for 
joy. Not so. City officials seem more interested in 
thinking up reasons not to go forward than in making a 
deal. The city should give Donald Trump a speedy 
hearing — the Wollman farce has been running long 
enough.” 

“Let him have a go at it,” said Newsday. “After all, 
the city has proved nothing except that it can’t get the 
job done.” 

If there’s one thing I’ve learned from dealing with 
politicians over the years, it’s that the only thing 
guaranteed to force them into action is the press — or, 
more specifically, fear of the press. You can apply all 
kinds of pressure, make all sorts of pleas and threats, 
contribute large sums of money to their campaigns, 



306 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Capaties: Rebuilding WoUman Rink * 307 


and generally it gets you nothing. But raise the possi- 
bility of bad press, even in an obscure publication, and 
most politicians will jump. Bad press translates into 
potential lost votes, and if a politician loses enough 
votes, he won't get reelected. If that happens, he 
might have to go out and take a 9 to 5 job. That's the 
last thing most politicians want to do. 

What you have to understand about Ed Koch is that 
he's a bully, pure and simple. Bullies may act tough, 
but they're really closet cowards. The only people 
bullies push around are the ones they know they can 
beat. Confront a strong, competent person, and he'll 
fight back harder than ever. Confront a bully, and in 
most cases he'll fold like a deck of cards. 

Sure enough, the tide turned, overnight. No sooner 
did the press jump on Koch's case than he reversed 
field completely. Suddenly, the city was virtually beg- 
ging me to take on the Woliman Rink job. On June 6, 
I sat down in my office with city officials, including 
Henry Stem, to negotiate the terms under which I’d 
rebuild the Woliman Rink. Until then, the city had 
insisted on competitive bidding, as is required on any 
city-financed construction job. I suggested a simple 
solution. Fd put up all of the money for the construc- 
tion of the rink myself. In turn, Fd be reimbursed, 
over as many years as it took, from any profits the 
rink earned. In other words, Fd not only supervise 
construction, Fd also lend the city $3 million for an 
indeterminate period — and forever if the rink didn't 
prove profitable. 

The city, in its infinite wisdom, balked. “There's no 


way we're going to allow that/' city officials told me. 
“There's no way we're going to allow you to make a 
profit on the rink." 

“No, you don't understand," I said. “If the rink 
does make money, I’ll use it to reduce my loan. I’m 
not looking for personal profit. In fact, if I ever do get 
my money back, F1J give any subsequent profits to 
charity." To my astonishment— and to the astonish- 
ment of my own lawyers — the city wouldn't budge. 
Instead, they came up with a counterproposal. I'd still 
put up the $3 million, as a way of getting around the 
competitive-bidding issue, but on the day I finished, 
the city would reimburse me in full. 

It's fortunate for those city officials that they chose 
to go into city government rather than business. The 
deal they were suggesting was far worse for the city 
than the one Fd originally offered. I wasn't about to 
fight them at my own expense. 

By the end of the day on Friday, June 6— ten days 
after my original offer — we came to an agreement, 
subject to final approval by the city's Board of Esti- 
mate. Fd put up the construction money and agree to 
complete the work by December 15. At that point, the 
city would reimburse me for my costs, up to a cap of 
just less than $3 million, but only if the rink worked. 
If I came in under budget, the city would pay me back 
only what Fd spent. If I went over budget, Fd cover 
the overruns myself. That much the city was graciously 
willing to let me do. 

I had just one challenge left: building the skating 
rink fast and building it right. If I failed — if I was 



308 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


even one day late, or one dollar over budget— my plan 
was to pack my bags and take the next plane to 
Argentina. There was no way Ed Koch or anyone else 
would ever let me live it down. 

Since I myself knew absolutely nothing about build- 
ing rinks, I set out to find the best skating-rink builder 
I could. Logic suggested that the best place to look 
was Canada. Ice skating is to Canadians what baseball 
is to Americans — the national pastime. The top build- 
ers, I figured, were probably the companies that built 
rinks for Canada's professional hockey teams. Sure 
enough, everyone I talked with agreed that a company 
called Cimeo, based in Toronto, was the best of the 
best. Among other projects, they'd built a rink for the 
Montreal Canadiens. I got their top guy on the phone, 
and I began with a very basic question: “What does it 
take to build a great outdoor skating rink?" 

He gave me a very quick course in rink construc- 
tion. The key choice, he said, was which ice-making 
system to use. The city had originally decided to use a 
relatively new technology in which the freezing agent 
is Freon. The rationale was that a Freon system re- 
quires less electricity, which translates into some mi- 
nor energy cost savings. The disadvantage of the Freon 
system is that it's far more delicate, temperamental, 
and difficult to maintain — particularly in a public facil- 
ity where personnel turns over frequently. Among 
ice-skating facilities that used the Freon system, my 
friend from Cimeo told me, at least one third had 
experienced problems. 

The other option, which had been used in hundreds 


tee Capades Rebuilding Woilman Rink * 309 


of skating rinks for decades, was a brine system, in 
which salt water is circulated through the pipes. It 
costs a little more to run than a Freon system, but the 
advantage is that it’s highly reliable and incredibly 
durable. The Rockefeller Center Skating Rink has 
used a brine system since it opened in 1936 and has 
never experienced a major problem. 

By the time I finished my first call, I’d made up my 
mind to use a brine system in rebuilding the Woilman 
Rink. The city, in fact, had finally come to the same 
conclusion. The only difference was that they first 
wasted six years and millions of dollars. 

I soon discovered that the city’s incompetence on 
the Wolhnan Rink project had extended to every 
imaginable detail, large and small. On June 16, one 
week after Td made my deal to take over rebuilding 
the rink, a city report was released on mistakes made 
at the Woilman Rink over the past six years. The study 
had taken fifteen months to complete — four times 
what I’d given myself to totally rebuild the rink. 
Worse yet, while the report provided endless examples 
of incompetence, it came to absolutely no conclusions 
about who was responsible for the fiasco and what 
could be done to avoid such failures in the future. 

The one thing the report did provide was an astounding 
chronology of sloppiness, indecision, incompetence 
and sheer stupidity. If it weren’t so pathetic, it would 
have been almost comical. 

The city first closed the rink for renovations in June 
1980. By the time plans had been drawn and the 
bidding process completed, almost a year had passed. 


310 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wollman Rink • 311 


In March 1981, work finally began on installing ap- 
proximately 22 miles of the very deiicate, expensive 
copper piping used in a Freon cooling system. In the 
meantime, however, the Parks Department had second 
thoughts about where to locate the compressor room 
and what sort of refrigeration equipment to use. Even 
as the piping was being installed, all work was halted 
on the equipment that would eventually be needed to 
operate the rink’s cooling system. 

Even if the ice-making equipment had been finished 
and installed, the design of the rink was such that it 
never had a chance of working. Specifically, the base 
of the rink was designed on a pitch, so that it was 
approximately eight inches higher at one end than at 
the other. The pitch had a purpose. The fact that it 
ended up being eleven inches was an accident. The 
point of the pitch was that during the summer the city 
hoped to use the rink as a reflecting pond, and appar- 
ently a pond reflects light better if its base is sloped. In 
the winter, however, that same sloped base would 
cause a problem. 

It doesn’t take a genius to realize that when you try 
to make ice under those circumstances, there are only 
two possibilities. The better one is that ice will form, 
but that because the depth of the water varies, the 
consistency of the ice won’t be uniform. The worse 
and far more likely result is that the water at the 
deeper end of the rink simply won’t freeze at all, no 
matter how powerful the ice-making machinery. 

Even that issue soon became secondary. In July, two 
months after the laying of the pipes began, a torrential 


rain flooded the rink, depositing a thick layer of silt on 
the newly laid pipes. It wasn’t until September that the 
Parks Department finally got around to hiring a crew 
to repair the damage. 

In the meantime, a new dispute had emerged within 
the Parks Department about how the concrete sidewalk 
surrounding the rink should be designed. The result 
was that the pouring of all concrete — including the 
concrete meant to form the rink’s base — was held up 
nine months while a debate over the sidewalk raged 
on. So, unfortunately, did winter. For nine months, the 
newly laid delicate copper pipes were exposed to 
horrible weather. There were major snowstorms and 
flooding. In addition, because copper is quite valu- 
able, vandals climbed over the fences and tried to cut 
off pieces of the pipe to resell. By the spring, it was as 
if those twenty-two miles of pipes had been through a 
war. Nonetheless, not one person thought to check 
them for possible damage. 

In June of 1982, two years after the rink was first 
closed, the concrete was finally poured over the untested 
copper pipes. Contractors often use a vibrating ma- 
chine when they pour over uneven surfaces, since it 
helps prevent bubbles from forming. However, the 
vibrating had an unforeseen result: it began shaking 
loose the joints of the copper pipes. At the same time, 
the contractor had even bigger problems to contend 
with: he had underestimated by a great deal how much 
concrete it would take to cover the rink. The key to 
pouring concrete is to do it all at once, on a continu- 
ous basis, because that's the only way to ensure it will 



312 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


adhere and mesh uniformly. Rather than interrupt his 
pour, the contractor decided to dilute his concrete 
mixture with water. It was a recipe for disaster 

Less than a week went by before cracks began 
appearing on the surface of the newly poured concrete 
slab. Not coincidentally, the cracks were concentrated 
at the end of the rink where the cement content had 
been diluted, and where the vibrating machine had 
been turned off. 

Delays in deciding where to locate the refrigeration 
equipment prompted another problem. By the time the 
city made its decision-rafter sixteen months of 
deliberations^— the contractor originally hired to install 
the equipment insisted on a “modification” of his 
original agreement. Specifically, he demanded more 
money. Those negotiations took another twelve months, 
and it wasn't until July 1983 that the city approved a 
new contract — on the contractor’s terms. The comple- 
tion date on installation of the refrigeration equipment 
was pushed forward yet again, to September 1984. 

In the late fall of 1984 the system was finally tested 
for the first time. It proved unable to sustain pressure 
for long enough to create ice because it turned out that 
there were leaks in the pipes beneath the concrete slab. 
Between October and December of 1984, six leaks 
were found and repaired. No luck. The system was 
tested again and still couldn’t make ice. 

It was at that point that I called Henry Stem and 
made my first offer to take over construction of the 
rink. When he turned me down, l said, “Listen, 
would you like to walk over together and take a look, 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wo 11 man Rink • 313 


and perhaps I can at least make some suggestions?” A 
few days later, in the dead of winter, we walked over 
to the rink, I was shocked by what I saw. 

There were literally hundreds of tiny cracks in the 
concrete slab. Worse than that, there were at least a 
dozen huge gaping holes cut into the slab at various 
places. When I inquired, I found out that the holes had 
been cut through the concrete in order to get at the 
leaks in the pipes underneath. Unfortunately, the jack- 
hammers used to make holes in concrete are very 
violent, and the pipes underneath are veiy delicate. In 
the effort to get at the leaking pipes, these violent 
men with their violent jackhammers actually made 
the problem much worse. 

Right then and there 1 turned to Stern and said, 
“You have a major problem. You’ll never find these 
leaks. In the meantime, you’ll just create bigger leaks. 
Forget if. Start all over."* Henry tried to be polite, but 
it was clear that starting over was the last thing he’d 
consider. 

In the spring of 1985, the city came up with a 
wonderful new idea. At a cost of $200,000, they hired 
an outside engineering consultant to study why Freon 
was leaking from the pipes, and to recommend solu- 
tions. The firm promised to have its report within four 
months. Nine months later— in December 1985 — the 
firm announced that they’d been unable to isolate the 
cause of the leaks. 

Nearly six years had now passed since the Wollman 
Rink was first closed for renovations. Nearly $13 
million had been spent on the effort. The Parks De- 




314 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wol lman Rink * 31$ 


partment finally concluded that the Freon system would 
have to be scrapped and replaced by a brine system. 
On May 21, 1986, they announced the new $3 milli on 
renovation plan and the eighteen-month timetable. 
That was when I finally convinced the city to let me 
take over. 

By mid-June, when the Board of Estimate approved 
the deal I’d negotiated with the city, I bad already 
begun work. One thing I discovered was that the city 
bad agreed to pay a $150,000 fee to yet another 
consulting company, this time to provide recommenda- 
tions about how to build the rink with a brine system. 
The city’s contract specified that the company, St. 
Onge Ruff Associates (SORA), would begin work on 
July 1, 1986, and deliver its report by the end of 
December. In other words, I had agreed to finish 
rebuilding the rink before the city was scheduled to get 
the report on how it ought to be done. 

On the off chance that the consultants might have 
some intelligent suggestions, I decided to sit down 
with them. 1 probably shouldn’t have been surprised 
by what I discovered: the two gentlemen who ran the 
firm were specialists in refrigeration but had never 
before been involved in building a skating rink. They 
hadn’t the faintest idea what it entailed. So much for 
their help. 

I hired Cimco to build the refrigeration and piping 
equipment for the system and to advise me generally. 
To build the rink itself, I hired HRH, the construction 
company that had already built the Hyatt and Trump 
Tower for me and had proved themselves high-quality 


general contractors. In this case, they generously offered 
to do the work at cost. Meanwhile, Chase Manhattan, 
with whom I had a long banking relationship, stepped 
forward and offered to lend all die money for construc- 
tion, again at no profit. It was the sort of project 
everyone could relate to and appreciate. 

When I went to see the rink, things were even 
worse than I’d imagined. For example, there were 
gaping holes in the roof of the skaters’ house, and the 
result had been massive water damage to the interior 
of the building. But even the smaller things 1 noticed 
reflected the city’s approach to the job. For example, 
as I walked into the rink, I came upon a row of canvas 
sacks, abandoned and half covered by weeds. When I 
looked inside, I discovered that the sacks were filled 
with plants, which were once intended to be part of 
the new landscaping. Instead, they’d been left on the 
ground, unopened, and had died. 

Just as I was making this discovery, a city worker 
walked by and stepped right on one of the few living 
plants on the site. He didn’t look back. In a way, it 
was a perfect metaphor the rink being trampled by 
one of the people who was being paid to fix it. 

The incident reminded me of a time, several years 
earlier, when I was walking by the rink on a beautiful 
summer day. It was about two in the afternoon, and 
there, right in the middle of the unfinished rink, were 
perhaps thirty laborers. Not one of them was working. 
I figured they were on coffee break. Perhaps an hour 
later, I walked past the rink again. The same men were 
there, in exactly die same positions, as if they were on 




316 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


a permanent siesta. I didn’t fully realize the implica- 
tions of the scene at the time. Now I saw it as a 
symptom of the bigger problem at Wollman Rink: 
there was absolutely oo one in charge. 

Leadership is perhaps the key to getting any job 
done. There wasn’t a single day when I didn’t check 
on the progress we were making on the rink. Most 
days, I visited the site personally. I’d given myself six 
months to finish, and based on the city’s record, 
meeting that deadline would be a minor miracle. By 
my own calculations, however, six months actually 
left me a cushion of a month, in case anything signifi- 
cant did go wrong. If absolutely everything went right, 
I felt it was possible we’d finish the job in four 
months. 

One of the first decisions we made was to build the 
new rink on top of the old one, rather than rip it out 
altogether. By the first of August, we were able to lay 
a level subbase for the new rink, on top of which we 
would install the piping and pour the concrete for a 
fiat-bottomed rink. Cimco was busy building two huge, 
35,000-pound refrigeration units. I hadn’t realized, 
when I offered to take on the job, how big Wollman 
Rink actually is. At nearly three quarters of an acre, it 
is one of the largest man-made skating rinks in the 
country. 

Even before we began construction, we were be- 
sieged by calls from the press, seeking progress reports. 
Reporters who normally had no interest whatsoever 
in construction suddenly wanted to know the smallest 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wollman Rink • 317 


details about the laying of pipe, the pouring of con- 
crete, and the building of a compressor room. 

After the Fust dozen or so calls, 1 decided to hold a 
press conference to answer everyone’s questions in a 
single forum. On August 7, with only the subfloor in 
place, we met the press at die rink. To my surprise, 
perhaps three dozen reporters, photographers, and cam- 
eramen showed up, including representatives from 
every local television station and both wire services. I 
had no earthshaking news to announce. All I could 
report was that everything was proceeding right on 
schedule and that we expected to be open by Decem- 
ber. That was enough. The next day there were stories 
in every newspaper with headlines like trump has an 

ICE SURPRISE FOR SKATERS and TRUMP PUTS THE ICING ON 
WOLLMAN CAKE. 

There were those who said I went a little overboard 
bolding press conferences about WoUman Rink. Perhaps 
they’re right, but I can only say that the press couldn’t 
get enough of this story. At least a dozen reporters 
showed up for every press conference we held. 

Nor did the story of the rink generate just local 
attention. Dozens of newspapers as far away as Miami, 
Detroit, and Los Angeles ran long pieces about the 
Wollman Rink saga. Time magazine devoted a full 
page in its "Nation” section to the story. It was a 
simple, accessible drama about the contrast between 
governmental incompetence and the power of effective 
private enterprise. 

From September 7 through 10, we laid twenty-two 
miles of pipes. On September 1 1, a convoy of cement 


318 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


trucks arrived and we began a continuous pour that 
lasted ten hours. There was no shortage of cement. 
The next day, when the engineers checked to see how 
evenly the pour had turned out, it was perfectly level. 
On September 15, the newly built refrigeration equip- 
ment was installed in the renovated compressor room. 
The only obstacle left was the heat. On the day we 
poured the concrete, the temperature climbed to 87 
degrees. It occurred to me that we were going to be 
ready for skaters before the weather was ready for us. 

By the end of September, all of our ice-making 
equipment was in place. All we needed to test our 
system was a succession of four days during which the 
temperature stayed below 55 degrees. Instead, for two 
weeks, one beautiful unseasonably warm day followed 
another. For the first time in my life, I found myself 
wishing for winter. 

Finally, on October 12, the temperature dropped 
below 55 and it stayed down for several days. On 
October 15, we conducted our first test of the new 
system, sending brine through the piping. There were 
no leaks and tbe pressure held. That night, following a 
rainfall, ice formed on the rink — beautiful, clear, long- 
awaited ice. It was almost four months to the day since 
I’d gotten approval to renovate the rink. We’d also 
managed to come in more than $750,000 under our $3 
million budget. With the city’s blessing, we used the 
leftover money to renovate the adjacent skatehouse 
and restaurant. 

During most of the construction, the city stayed out 
of our way — in large part because I instructed my men 


Ice Capades : Rebuilding Wo l iman Rink * 319 


to keep park officials off the site* When they did try to 
interfere, it invariably turned into disaster. As an 
example, after we'd finished the rink, a crew from the 
Parks Department showed up carting a small tree, 
which, they announced, the city wanted to plant in my 
honor. It wasn't enough for one or two guys to handle 
the job, A crew of perhaps a half dozen men came, 
among them a park horticulturist to supervise the job. 
The tree itself was transported in a tractor with a 
back-hoe loader. 

By total coincidence* I walked up to the rink just as 
the men were beginning to plant the tree. It happened 
to be one of the ugliest, scrawniest little trees you're 
ever likely to see, 1 could have lived with that. What 
got me absolutely nuts was the way they were planting 
the tree. Just the previous day, we'd planted beautiful 
specimen sod all around the perimeter of the rink. It 
had rained the night before and the ground under the 
newly planted grass was soft. What do these men do 
but drive their tractor right over the new grass, completely 
trampling it. In a matter of minutes, these six men— 
most of whom weren't needed in the first place — 
managed to totally destroy a beautiful planting job dial 
had taken two days to complete and now would 
require three months to grow back in. 

Around this time, 1 got a letter from Gordon Davis, 
the parks commissioner before Henry Stem, Davis 
wrote to say that as the person primarily responsible 
for the early problems at the rink he was “delighted 
and relieved to see how superbly [his] mistakes had 
been corrected.” I happen to believe that Davis was 


320 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wollman Rink >321 


far from the only person responsible. But what struck 
me most about his gracious attitude was how radically 
it contrasted with that of Henry Stem, 

Throughout the Wollman project, Stem took numer- 
ous opportunities to minimize to reporters what we 
were accomplishing. The Daily News, noting one 
particularly snide comment Stem made, snapped back 
in an editorial. “Try saying thanks, Henry/’ they 
wrote, “It’s more dignified, under the circumstances,” 
Koch himself was not exactly effusive about what 
we’d accomplished. Again, 1 think the media may 
have been a factor. In October, all the local newspa- 
pers ran stories that surely must have made him a little 
defensive. The Times , for example, ran a lead editorial 
that began, “New York City bungled the job of 
reopening Wollman Skating Rink for six years, wast- 
ing millions,” and ended by saying, “The lessons of 
the Wollman Rink ought not to be forgotten.” 

Whenever they were asked, both Koch and Stem 
told reporters that after the job was done, the city 
intended to meet with me, and my people, to see 
whether the lessons of Wollman Rink could be applied 
to other city projects. If I heard them make that 
statement once, I must have heard it a dozen times, 
including in several speeches on November 13, the 
day we officially opened the rink to the public. 

I’ve yet to get a call from any city official seeking a 
meeting, I can’t honestly say l’m surprised. The bad 
press has died down, and that’s all any of them were 
really concerned about. 

Still, I believe there are some lessons the city could 


take away from what we accomplished at Wollman 
Rink. At one point, Koch offered his own explanation 
for why we were able to do what the city could not. 
“Trump put in a cushion/’ Koch said, “and then he 
was able to reduce it by working as hard as he could 
with an elite crew, who knew that if they screwed up 
the job, they would never work for Donald Thrnip 
again.” 

That explanation wasn’t totally wrong. What Koch 
didn’t understand is that the city could have done some 
of the very same things I did. I’m not suggesting they 
would have been able to complete the job in five 
months, as I did, or even in six months. But there is 
no conceivable excuse for not completing it in a year, 
much less for failing for six years. That’s incompe- 
tence, plain and simple, and incompetence was at the 
heart of this whole sad saga. 

City officials invariably cite two reasons why they 
can’t move as quickly as private developers. The first 
is that, by law, the city must award any contract to the 
lowest bidder, regardless of whether that person is best 
qualified to do the work. There is at least a partial 
solution. Objective qualifying standards ought to be 
adopted for any bidder on a city job. Provable past 
performance, for example, should be required across 
the board. In addition, any contractor who docs good 
work for the city — coming in on time and on budget — 
ought to be given priority on future city jobs. 

The other disadvantage city officials cite is the 
so-called Wicks law. It requires that on any public con- 
struction job budgeted over $50,000, the work must be 



322 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


divided among at least four separate contractors. The 
law was designed to increase competition and reduce 
building costs, but it does just the opposite. No single 
general contractor is permitted to have overall respon- 
sibility, and the result is frequent delays, disputes, and 
overruns* 

I don’t deny that these laws put a crimp on the city, 
but 1 believe a far bigger problem is leadership. 

I know from my own experience that the only way 
to get even the best contractor to finish a job on time 
and on budget is to lean on him very, very hard. You 
can get any job done through sheer force of will — -and 
by knowing what you’re talking about. As it is now, a 
contractor will come in and say to a city official, ‘Tm 
sorry, but we’ve run into this problem, and we’re 
going to need another one million or two million 
dollars to finish the job.” No one argues back, be- 
cause virtually no one in city government knows 
anything about construction. 

Worst of all, no one in the city government bureau- 
cracy is held accountable for failure. I'll give you 
what I consider the classic example. Back in 1984 — by 
which time the city had already spent four years trying 
to rebuild Wollman Rink— a man named Bronson 
Binger held a press conference. At the time, Singers 
title was assistant parks commissioner, and his primary 
responsibility was the renovation of Wollman Rink. 
Binger made a bold, confident announcement to the 
reporters who showed up. If the Wollman isn’t ready 
to reopen in time for next season, he told them, then 
he’d resign his job. 


Ice Capades: Rebuilding Wollman Rink * 323 


A year passed, the rink obviously didn’t reopen, 
and Binger was true to his word. He resigned. There 
was just one catch. A short time Later he was named 
deputy commissioner in charge of prison construction 
for the State of New York, I don’t know much about 
building prisons, but one thing is certain: renovating 
ice rinks is a lot easier You don’t reward failure by 
promoting those responsible for it, because all you’ll 
get is more failure. 

The one group that does benefit from the city’s 
incompetence are the contractors who do the work. 
When a subway project or a new highway or a bridge 
goes over budget by millions of dollars, contractors 
clean up. You won’t read the names of these people on 
the Forbes Four Hundred and they may not all speak 
perfect English, but I’ll guarantee you this: many of 
them have become immensely wealthy working for 
New York City. They earn vast sums from huge, 
unwarranted cost overruns that city officials approve — 
and taxpayers underwrite. 

The gala opening celebration for the rink was pro- 
duced by former skating champions Dick Button and 
Aja Zanova-Steindler. They managed to bring together 
for one show most of the world’s best skaters: Peggy 
Fleming, Dorothy Hamill, Scott Hamilton, Debbi 
Thomas, Robin Cousins, Toller Cranston, the teams of 
Torvill and Dean and Blumberg and Seibert, and 
others. It was a great occasion. 

Had the city then turned over the finished rink to a 
second-rate operator, this story might still have a bad 
ending. But because normal competitive bidding would 


324 * TRUMP: THE ART Of THE DEAL 

have led to a new delay in opening the rink, the city 
asked me to operate the rink on a temporary basis for 
the first season. Again, I just looked for the best rink 
managers available. The answer 1 came up with was 
Ice Capades. Besides doing great ice shows. Ice Capades 
operate some of the best rinks in the country. 

They’ve done an impeccable job with Wollman 
Rink. It’s not only beautifully run, it’s been highly 
successful. During the 1970s, when the rink was still 
open and run by the city, it earned an average gross of 
approximately $100,000 a year and never took in more 
than $150,000. Although we charged prices below 
those of any private city rink — $4.50 a session for 
adults, $2.50 for children — we earned $1.2 million in 
revenues during our first season. Profits exceeded 
$500,000 after expenses, and all of it went to charity 
and the Parks Department. But equally important, 
more than a half million skaters enjoyed the Wollman 
Rink. 

Even now, as I write this in the spring of 1987, 1 get 
a real kick every time I look out the window of my 
living room in Trump Tower and see hundreds of 
skaters on the Wollman Rink- However, 1 won’t be 
one of them. People have been waiting for years to 
watch me fail, but I’m not about to help the cause. 
Skating isn’t my strong suit. 


13 

COMEBACK 

A West Side 
Story 


T he toughest business decision I ever made 
was giving up my option on the West Side 
yards — seventy-eight riverfront acres between 
59th Street and 72nd Street — in the summer of 1979. 
The easiest business decision 1 ever made was buying 
back those same hundred acres in January 1985. 

I have a tendency to get very enthusiastic about any 
deal 1 make, but 1 suspect few people would argue that 
those hundred acres represent the single best undevel- 
oped piece of property in America today. 

It has been reported that 1 paid $95 million for the 
West Side yards, or about $1 million an acre, which is 

525 


326 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


not far from the correct figure. Taking the time value 
of money into account, I paid less to purchase the site 
in 1985 than I would have if I’d exercised my option 
to buy them in 1979. During the intervening years, the 
price of most Manhattan real estate increased as much 
as five times. Even before I put up a single building, 
Fm certain I could sell the property at a very substan- 
tial profit, and Fve turned down numerous offers 
already. Consider just one comparison. Very shortly 
after I bought the West Side yards, another group of 
developers paid approximately $500 million for the 
Columbus Circle Coliseum site, a tiny property by 
comparison, and just four blocks away, 

I got the yards at a great price because a bank was 
foreclosing on a desperate seller, because I made the 
deal before the property was offered for sale on the 
open market, and because I was one of the few 
developers both willing and able to pay millions of 
dollars a year in carrying costs for as long as it took to 
get the yards developed. 

Securing the option to purchase the West Side yards 
from the Penn Central Railroad back in 1974 was the 
first major deal T made in Manhattan. At the time, as 
Fve said, the city was on the verge of bankruptcy, and 
the West Side was hardly considered a great place to 
live. But I had a simple conviction; I couldn’t go very 
wrong buying spectacular riverfront property in the 
middle of Manhattan at a bargain-basement price. 

Over the next five years, however, government 
subsidies dried up for the kind of middle-income 
housing I was proposing, community opposition to 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 327 


any development on the West Side reached a fever 
pitch, and banks remained reluctant to finance any 
large-scale developments. Perhaps most important, I 
was launching other projects— among them the 
Commodore/Hyatt, Thimp Tower, and my first Atlantic 
City casino. Nor was I eager to load myself down with 
huge canying costs while my personal resources were 
still very limited. 

By devoting myself to other deals instead, I generat- 
ed a cash flow large enough to support the carrying 
costs on virtually any project, I also built a record of 
success dial made banks happy to lend me money for 
nearly any deal. 

Shortly after I gave up my original option in 1979, 
the Penn Central sold the West Side yards to my friend 
Abe Hirschfeld. Very quickly, Abe went out and got 
himself a partner on the deal. Francisco Macri became 
wealthy in the 1960s building bridges for the govern- 
ment in his native Argentina. Under the deal with 
Hirschfeld, Macri agreed to take over the job totally. 
Hirschfeld retained a substantia] percentage of profits 
but no ongoing role in the project. Macri, in turn, 
gave the job of overseeing the project day-to-day to a 
man named Carlos Varsavsky, a former physics profes- 
sor who’d been running Macri ’s Argentinian company, 
BA Capital. 

The Macri team had plenty of brainpower. What 
they lacked was practical experience, especially in 
New York City, where it is so difficult to do any sort 
of real estate development. 

The first key to developing any huge Manhattan site 


328 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * $29 



is getting the necessary approvals to build a job that is 
economically viable, Rezoning is a complex, highly 
political, and very time-consuming process that ulti- 
mately involves a dozen city and state agencies, as 
well as local community groups and politicians, 

Maori did finally manage to get his zoning for the 
project he named Lincoln West, But in the process he 
made far too many concessions to the city. Being 
forced to sell out may have been the best thing that 
ever happened to him. If Macri had ever tried to build 
the project under the terms to which he'd agreed, he 
would have lost hundreds of millions of dollars. 

It was sad, in a way, because Franco Macri is a 
wonderful and well-meaning man. But he made a 
critical misjudgment from the start: he assumed that in 
a project as big as the West Side yards, he could afford 
to absorb nearly any costs and still end up with a huge 
profit. The truth is that unless you design a project to 
be self-supporting as you build it, you risk getting 
eaten alive before you’ve turned the comer into profit. 
One of Macri T s problems was that he tried to apply 
the principles of bridge-building to a residential devel- 
opment. When you build a bridge, under contract to 
the government, you calculate the costs and sign a 
contract for a set amount. All you need to do to earn a 
profit is bring the project in on budget. In developing 
real estate, it’s a whole different ball game. You can 
budget building costs, but you can’t truly project 
revenues, because you 1 re always at the mercy of the 
market. The variables include how much you get per 
unit, how long it takes to sell out, and what your 


carrying costs are along the way. The less you commit 
to spend up front, the less you’re at risk later. 

Instead, Macri spent three years mostly in the busi- 
ness of giveaways. The city, eager to get all it could in 
return for approving the project, asked Macri for 
concession after concession. Macri began by agreeing 
to provide $30 million to refurbish the 72nd Street 
subway station nearest to the project’ — even though the 
projected renovation amounted to little more than 
widening a single platform by four feet. For $30 
million, you ought to be able to totally rebuild a 
station. 

Next, Macri threw in a $5 million pledge for a 
railroad flat-car operation in the South Bronx to re- 
place the one he’d be eliminating in the West Side 
yards. Then he promised to chip in $30 million for a 
public park within his development. Later, he agreed 
to build a new public through street connecting with 
the existing city grid— a job that would have surely 
cost tens of millions of dollars. 

When Con Edison asked Macri to underwrite the 
cost of rebuilding a smokestack the company owned 
on the site, he even agreed to that. This I found 
particularly preposterous. Con Edison already gets one 
of the highest utility rates in the country. When I met 
Macri, I asked him why he’d agreed to do anything for 
Con Ed, Wasn’t it enough, I asked, that over the years 
he was going to be buying billions of dollars worth of 
electricity from them? 

“They told me they were going to oppose my 



330 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 331 


project,” Macri explained. “And anyway, what's the 
big deal? How much can a smokestack cost?” 

Suddenly I understood: Franco Macri hadn't bothered 
to check. But I did. To put a needle 500 feet into the 
air, it turns out, costs nearly as much as putting up a 
building, “It could run to thirty or even forty million 
dollars,” I told Macri, He still didn’t seem fazed. By 
the time he’d finished being generous to anyone who 
asked, Marci had committed more than $100 million 
in giveaways. Worse yet, he’d agreed to pay in full for 
much of it before he’d erected any buildings — much 
less sold a single apartment. 

Equally bad was the zoning to which Macri finally 
agreed. By the time the process was finished, he’d 
been negotiated down to less than 4,300 residential 
units on his hundred-acre site — a density tower than 
you find in some six -story apartment complexes in the 
suburbs. More specifically, Macri agreed to build just 
850 units in the most valuable part of his site — 68th 
Street to 72nd Street— which was adjacent to an existing 
residential neighborhood. The great majority of his 
apartments he agreed to put in the undeveloped indus- 
trial southern end of the site, where the residential 
market remained totally untested. 

Antidevelopment forces on the Upper West Side 
barely had to fight with Macri. He became his own 
worst enemy. 

The last major mistake Macri made was that he 
never set out to create any excitement about his 
Lincoln West project. During the four years when he 
owned this terrific piece of property, virtually not a 


word was written about it. Even the name Lincoln 
West implied that, despite the fact that this represented 
one of the largest and potentially most important 
developments in the United States, it was merely a job 
located west of Lincoln Center. 

An average 150-unit luxury high-rise building in 
New York takes two years to sell out — and that as- 
sumes a strong market and good promotion. To sell 
literally thousands of units in a new development 
requires that you have both something unique to sell 
and a very aggressive approach to selling it. Macri 
had neither. The Lincoln West development he had 
proposed— two dozen relatively short brick buildings 
— was as bland and uninspiring as any of a dozen 
public housing projects that were thrown up around 
Manhattan during the 1960s. It was scarcely surprising 
that not one of at least a dozen banks Macri called 
on over three years was willing to lend him money for 
his construction, even though banks were practically 
throwing money at dozens of other New York City 
developments. 

By late 1983, Macri also had personal cash prob- 
lems. The war in the Falklands apparently had hurt his 
business interests in Argentina. By this point, counting 
outlays for architectural staff, environmental-impact 
studies, and carrying costs, Macri was probably in to 
Lincoln West for more than $100 million. Caught in a 
crunch, he began defaulting on the original loan he’d 
taken from Chase Manhattan to purchase the land. 

In die spring of 1984 1 got a call from Abe Hiischfeld. 
He told me that Macri was in trouble and was interest- 


332 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 333 


ed in selling. I went to see Maori, and we began a 
long negotiation. He was eager to get out with a 
profit. At the same time, the bank was breathing down 
his neck. Sum enough, in November, we finally agreed 
to an all-cash price of approximately $100 million, 
and Chase agreed to finance a good part of the 
transaction. 

One of the reasons Franco Maori agreed to sell to 
me, l v m convinced, is that I’d done him a favor long 
before we finally made a deal. Shortly after our first 
meeting in early 1984, we agreed on the terms of a 
tentative deal under which Macri would sell me the 
project. He wasn’t yet certain that he wanted to sell, 
but he was willing to consider signing at least a letter 
of intent. One of the first things that anyone should 
leam about real estate — and New York real estate in 
particular — is never to sign a letter of intent. Years 
can be spent in court trying to get out of a seemingly 
simple and “nonbinding" agreement. 

Macri did not fully realize this, and in addition, my 
lawyer, Jerry Schrager, drafted a letter of intent that 
was significantly more binding than most. 

It was with an eye to getting this letter signed that 
Jerry and I sat down in mid- 1984, in an extraordinary 
apartment at the Sherry Netherland Hotel, along with 
Macri, his young son, and a beautiful interpreter 
named Christina. She was a true Latin beauty, and all 
of us were somewhat distracted. I’ll never forget 
Christina’s stopping in the middle of translating a 
complex legal point and saying to Macri, “You really 


should get a lawyer to help you understand the mean- 
ing of this document. If s very complicated.’* 

“No, no, Christina/’ he said. “As long as I can get 
out of it, ifs not so important.'’ And he went ahead 
and signed. 

As it turned out, Macri retained his dream of pro- 
ceeding with the project, and several months later he 
called and asked me to let him rescind his letter of 
intent. I declined, but he asked if we could meet, and I 
agreed. 

Macri explained that the project was killing him, 
but that he desperately wanted to make one last effort 
to get his financing and move forward, I couldn’t help 
feeling sympathetic, having spent years myself work- 
ing to launch difficult projects. 1 also appreciated his 
openness. 

I took the letter of intent out of a folder and tore it 
in two, in front of Macri. And then 1 said to him, “If 
you should ever again decide to sell, I hope you’ll 
think of me first. In the meantime, good luck.” 

When I told Schrager what I’d done, he wasn’t 
happy, hut to this day I’m convinced that my ripping 
up that letter— which may or may not have been 
binding — is the reason that Macri did come back 
to me, instead of going to any of a dozen other poten- 
tial bidders, when it finally became clear that he 
couldn’t get his financing after ail. 

Even before 1 signed the purchase papers in January 
1985, I had the basic elements of my plan in mind. I 
intended to build many fewer buildings than Macri, 
and all along a single block. Views were the site’s 


$34 * TRUMP THE ART OF THE DEAL 


single strongest selling point, and I wanted every 
apartment to have unobstructed views either of the 
Hudson River to the west, the extraordinary cityscape 
to the east, or both. I also intended to build much 
taller buildings than Maori had planned, to take full 
advantage of the views and also because I believed tall 
buildings would make the project more majestic and 
alluring. 

I also envisioned a huge retail shopping promenade 
on the ground leveU along the riverfront in front of the 
buildings. What the Upper West Side of Manhattan 
needs more than anything else, I believe, is basic 
shopping services — large supermarkets, shoe stores, 
pharmacies, and hardware stores. Rents along Broad- 
way, Amsterdam Avenue, and Columbus Avenue have 
gotten so high that small shopkeepers have been driven 
out- It’s easier today to find a $100 pair of leather 
gloves on Columbus Avenue than a loaf of bread . One 
advantage of my low land cost is that I will be able to 
charge more reasonable rents to retail tenants. 

My plans were contingent, of course, on what sort 
of zoning I could get. I didn't have to undertake 
complex cost analyses to know that the only way to 
make the project feasible was to get approval for many 
more units and total square feet of buildabie space 
than Maori got. Unlike Macri, I was prepared to hold 
out for as long as it took — even into another city 
administration if necessary— to win approval for a 
plan I believe can be economically workable. 

My first goal was to put as much distance as 
possible between Maori's approved project and my 


Comeback . A West Side Story * 3SS 


own vision for the site. Any link to his project could 
only hurt me. 

At the time he sold to me, Macri had yet to sign any 
formal contract with the city, and the city had yet to 
issue him a final building permit. I was under no 
obligation, therefore, to deliver on his many promises. 
Starting the process over from scratch meant I’d have 
to spend much more time and money, but 1 felt there 
was no other choice. 

My first critical challenge was to make the project 
exciting and attractive to the city so that they'd be 
inclined to give me the zoning approvals I needed. 
The key was to find a mutual interest. Deals work best 
when each side gets something it wants from the other. 
By luck, I picked up the newspaper one morning soon 
after purchasing the site, and the answer came to me. 
It turned out that NBC, which had long had headquar- 
ters in Rockefeller Center, was looking to relocate. 
Edward S. Gordon, a top New York real estate broker, 
then confirmed this to me. Among the possibilities 
NBC had in mind was a move across the river to New 
Jersey, where they stood to save considerable money 
by virtue of that state’s lower taxes and land costs. 

For the city to lose any large company is obviously 
bad, but there could hardly be a worse blow than 
losing NBC, Pure economics are part of die issue. The 
city's economic development agency has estimated 
that if NBC moves, it will cost New York some 4,000 
jobs, and perhaps $500 million a year in revenues. 

The psychological loss would be at least as great. 
It s one thing to lose a manufacturing company no one 


336 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 337 


has ever heard of* It's another to lose a company that 
is a crucial part of what makes New York the media 
capital of the world. The two other networks, ABC 
and CBS, now produce nearly all their programs in 
Los Angeles. NBC still does (he Today show, the NBC 
Nightly News r Late Night with David Letterman, The 
Cosby Show, Saturday Night Live , and other shows 
from New York, You can’t put a specific dollar value 
on the excitement and glamour of being home to the 
number-one network and its top-rated shows. It’s like 
trying to assess what New York would be like without 
the Empire State Building or the Statue of Liberty. 

With the West Side yards, I had something to offer 
NBC that no other New York developer could possibly 
match; enough space to build huge single-story studios 
in the style of Hollywood backlots. NBC was making 
do at Rockefeller Center with a cramped L2 million 
square feet of space. On my site, I could offer them 2 
million square feet, as well as room for future expan- 
sion, and I’d still have plenty of room left over to 
build the rest of the project I had in mind. 

In addition, because my land costs had been so low, 
I was in a position to offer NBC a price per square 
foot far below what they might otherwise get in New 
York. Even at that, to be truly competitive with a New 
Jersey offer, I knew Td need a tax abatement from the 
city. But I also knew that it was in the city’s economic 
interest to provide incentives for NBC to stay. 

The more 1 thought about it, the better I liked the 
idea. Even if NBC ultimately decided not to move to 
my site, it was still a perfect place to build television 


and motion picture studios. With or without NBC, I 
felt studios would be a good, high-profile business. 
Before I got a commitment from the network, I decid- 
ed to design my project around the studio concept. 
The first step was the name: Television City. 

My second challenge was to find a way to immedi- 
ately capture the public imagination with my project. 
The more awareness and excitement I could create 
early on, the easier it was going to be to attract buyers 
down the line. A lot of developers build first and 
promote later, if at all. 

The world’s tallest building was a project I’d consid- 
ered undertaking even before I purchased the West Side 
yards. I've always loved very tall buildings. I remember 
coming in from Brooklyn as a kid with my father and 
pleading with him to take us to see the Empire State 
Building, which at the time was the world’s tallest 
building. But then Chicago built the Sears Tower and 
took away the title. I loved the challenge of bringing the 
world’s tallest building back to New York, where I felt 
it really belonged. 

In a way, 1 saw the building as a loss leader. When 
you build any structure higher than about 50 stories, 
the construction costs escalate geometrically. If maxi- 
mum profit is your sole motive, you’re far better off 
putting up three 50- story towers than one 150-story 
skyscraper. On the other hand, 1 felt the building 
would ultimately pay for itself as a tourist attraction 
and an overall lure. After all, how many millions of 
tourists have come, as I once did, to see the Empire 
State Building? 


338 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 339 


The next challenge was to find an architect who was 
as enthusiastic as I was about making such a building 
the centerpiece of this project. In the end, I interviewed 
only two architects. The first was Richard Meier, who 
represents the epitome of the New York architectural 
establishment. Critics adore Meier, and he has a big 
following. But what I discovered very quickly is that 
Meier is not the sort of guy who jumps in with great 
energy and enthusiasm. He prefers to spend time 
pondering and analyzing and theorizing. For weeks, I 
waited for him to bring me a scale model of a plan, or 
at least some preliminary drawings. Nothing came. 

In the meantime, I also met with Helmut Jahn. I 
liked him for very different reasons than 1 liked Meier, 
iahn was an outsider: German-born , Chicago-based, in 
no way part of the New York architectural establish- 
ment. He was a bit of a dandy personally, a very good 
promoter, and he’d gotten very good notices for some 
very daring work. Among other things, Jahn designed 
the Xerox Center in downtown Chicago and the high- 
tech State of Illinois building. At the time 1 talked 
with him, he had four major buildings under way in 
midtown Manhattan. 

What I liked most about Helmut was that he be- 
lieved, as I did, that big can be beautiful. He liked 
spectacle. Less than three weeks after we first talked, 
he arrived in my office with a scale model of a project 
that incorporated the basic elements I'd told him I 
wanted, as well as several of his own. In the summer 
of 1985, I hired Jahn to be the project’s chief architect. 

By the fall, we T d batted back and forth a dozen 


possible designs for the site. Both of us felt that the 
site was so big and so distinctive that it made no sense 
to try to create something that blended into the sur- 
rounding community. Instead, we saw this as a chance 
to build a self-contained city, with a look and a 
character wholly distinct from the disparate surround- 
ing neighborhoods. 

On November 18, we held a press conference to 
announce our plan for the site. For years, while Maori 
pursued his Lincoln West plan, the media had ignored 
him. This time, no fewer than fifty reporters — local and 
national — showed up for our announcement. 1 ran down 
the basic elements. We were calling it Television City, 
and we hoped to lure NBC as our prime tenant. We 
intended to build a mixed-use development totaling 18.5 
million square feet of commercial, residential, and retail 
space. The project would include approximately 8,000 
residential units, 3.5 million square feet of TV and 
motion-picture studios and offices, 1.7 million square 
feet of retail space, 8,500 parking spaces, and almost 
forty acres of parks ami open space, including a thirteen- 
block waterfront promenade. At the center of the site, 
we’d erect the world’s tallest building— 1 ,670 feet high — 
or about 200 feet higher than the Sears Tower in 
Chicago. 

To me, the beauty of the plan was its simplicity and 
its grandeur. In addition to the world’s tallest building, 
we’d put up just seven other buildings — three at the 
north end, four at the south. A decked-over three-level 
platform in front of the buildings — including parking 
and enclosed shopping — would permit us to put a 



I 


340 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


pedestrian promenade on top, at a level slightly higher 
than the adjacent West Side Highway. The result 

would be to provide an unimpeded view of the river 

■■ 

from virtually any spot on the site. We d also have 
enormous space for parks. In all, our proposal was 
about 50 percent bigger than Maori’s — but even at 
that, the overall density was lower than that of many 
smaller developments squeezed onto tiny midtown 
sites. 

Most reporters, 1 find, have very little interest in 
exploring the substance of a detailed proposal for a 
development. They look instead for the sensational 
angle. In this case, that may have worked to my 
advantage. I was prepared for questions about density 
and traffic and the mix of housing on the site, but 
instead, all the reporters wanted to talk about was the 
world's tallest building. It gave the project an instant 
mystique. When I got home that night, I switched on 
the CBS Evening News , expecting to hear news from 
the opening of the summit between Ronald Reagan 
and Mikhail Gorbachev. Dan Rather was in Geneva 
anchoring the program, but after summarizing the 
day's developments, suddenly he was saying: “In 
New York City today, developer Donald Trump an- 
nounced plans to build the world’s tallest building." It 
demonstrated how powerful and intoxicating a symbol 
I'd found for my project. 

The reaction to the world’s tallest building was 
hardly uniformly positive, but I fully expected that. 
The controversy actually helped keep the project in the 
news. Critics insisted that such a building was unnec- 


Comeback: A Wes t Side Story • 341 

essary, that people wouldn’t want to live up so high, 
and that I'd never be able to build it anyway. Newsweek 
did a full-page story about the building, headlined 
DONALD trump's lofty AMBmoN. The AW York Times 
ran an editorial about my plan, which probably added 
to its credibility. “Time alone," the editorial said, 
“can distinguish between great dreams and vain illu- 
sions. It s too early to know which describes Donald 
Trump s desire to loom over New York and all other 
cityscapes with a 150-story tower." 

My favorite reaction to the world's tallest building 
came from columnist George Will. I've always liked 
Will, in part because he's not afraid to challenge 
fashion. “Donald Trump is not being reasonable," 
Will wrote. “But, then, man does not live by reason 
alone, fortunately, "frump, who believes that excess 
can be a virtue, is as American as Manhattan’s sky- 
line, which expresses the Republic’s erupting ener- 
gies, He says the superskyscraper is necessary because 
it is unnecessary. He believes architectural exuberance 
is good for us [and] he may have a point. Brashness, 
zest and 6\an are part of this country’s character." 

My only regret was that George WiU didn’t have a 
seat on the City Planning Commission. 

To my surprise, as time passed, opposition to the 
world’s tallest building seemed to diminish. Critics 
focused instead on other aspects of the development, 
which I'd expected to be less controversial. In particu- 
lar, the Times architecture critic, Paul Goldberger, 
launched something of a crosade against Television 
City. A week after I announced my plans, Goldberger 



342 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story • M3 


wrote a long piece entitled “Is Trump’s Latest Propos- 
al Just a Castle in the Air?" His major criticism, aside 
from the fact that he simply doesn’t like tall buildings, 
was that the project hadn’t been sufficiently integrated 
into the rest of the neighborhood. 

That, of course, was precisely what I liked best 
about it. The worst thing I could do, I was convinced, 
was to build something that blended into the surround- 
ings. Ten years earlier. I’d taken the same position on 
the rebuilding of the Commodore/Hyatt Hotel. The 
Grand Central neighborhood was dying, and I felt the 
only chance at success was to build a spectacular new 
hotel sheathed in reflective glass, so that it stood apart 
from the dull, older buildings in the neighborhood. 
The hotel became an enormous success, and eventual- 
ly even the critics came around. Reading Goldberger, I 
felt I was reliving the Commodore experience. 

I felt certain I’d get far better reviews from Paul 
Goldberger and certain other critics simply by cutting 
my buildings in half and making them look more like 
the better-known prewar buildings on the West Side. 
The problem was that my project would no longer be 
majestic or distinctive, and it wouldn’t sell. It irritates 
me that critics, who’ve neither designed nor built 
anything themselves, are given carte blanche to ex- 
press their views in the pages of major publications, 
whereas the targets of their criticism are almost never 
offered space to respond. Of course, I can be irritated 
all I want and it won’t do any good. So long as a critic 
writes for a newspaper like the New York Times, his 


opinion will continue to cany great weight— whether 1 
like it or not. 

By the spring of 1986, the project we’d proposed 
was at something of a standstill with city planning. 
Much of the explanation was that city government 
itself had become almost completely paralyzed, under 
the mayoral administration of Ed Koch. 

Koch has achieved something quite miraculous. 
He’s presided over an administration that is both 
pervasively corrupt and totally incompetent. Richard 
Daley, the former mayor of Chicago, managed to sur- 
vive corruption scandals because at least he seemed 
able to operate his city efficiently. Under Koch, the 
problem of the homeless has grown far worse, the vast 
majority of the city remains unwired for cable, high- 
ways have gone unrepaired, subway tunnels have been 
left unfinished, companies have continued to flee to 
other cities and city services have deteriorated in- 
exorably. 

Meanwhile, no fewer than a dozen Koch appointees 
and cohorts have been indicted on charges of bribery, 
perjury, and accepting kickbacks, or have been forced 
to resign in disgrace after admitting various ethical 
transgressions. The criminally indicted include Jay 
TWoff, the former head of the Taxi and Limousine 
Commission, John McLaughlin, the hospitals chief, 
and Anthony Ameruso, the former transportation com- 
missioner. Victor Botnick, one of Koch's closest per- 
sonal advisers, quit after it was revealed that he’d lied 
about his educational background and had taken nu- 
merous unnecessary trips under the pretext of doing 



344 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 345 


city business, Bess Myerson, the cultural affairs com- 
missioner and one of Koch’s best friends, resigned in 
disgrace and was eventually indicted after it came out 
that she’d given a job to the daughter of a judge she 
was seeking to influence and had then lied repeatedly 
about her involvement. Later it came out that Koch 
ignored evidence that Myerson had acted improperly. 

The irony is that Koch made his reputation by 
boasting about his integrity and incorruptibility. It 
doesn’t seem to occur to him that if the people he 
appoints prove to be corrupt, then in the end he must 
take the responsibility. To the contrary, at the first hint 
that any of his friends might be in trouble, Koch can’t 
run fast enough the other way. For example, when his 
close friend Donald Manes, the late Queens borough 
president, came under investigation and tried to com- 
mit suicide, Koch immediately called him “a crook,” 
even though Manes had yet to be indicted for any- 
thing. At the time, Manes was recovering in a hospi- 
tal. Weeks later, he did succeed in killing himself. 

As for the Koch appointees who managed to avoid 
criminal indictment, the scandal is their sheer incom- 
petence. Many just lack talent. Others seem to have 
concluded that the safest approach to protecting their 
jobs is to stop making decisions of any kind; at least 
then they can’t be accused of breaking the law. The 
problem is that when officials in a huge city govern- 
ment stop making decisions, you get the bureaucratic 
equivalent of gridlock. Dishonesty is intolerable, but 
inaction and incompetence can be every bit as bad. 

In any case, the city was also stonewalling my 


project as a means of trying to force me to make 
changes. In my view it was a form of economic 
blackmail. So long as I resisted their ideas, they held 
up my approvals, and my costs mounted. 

Specifically, city planning wanted me to provide 
more direct access to the waterfront, add more east- 
west streets connecting the project to the existing city 
street grid, and move the world’s tallest building 
south, away from the existing residential neighbor- 
hoods. I disagreed with their suggestions, but I also 
recognize that zoning is always a matter of negotia- 
tion. As hard as I push, in the end Fm practical. If it 
took making some compromises to get the project 
moving forward, and the result didn’t undermine the 
project’s economic viability, I was prepared to make 
the changes. 

In March, I decided to move the location of the 
world’s tallest building south to 63rd Street. The 
people at city planning were immediately more enthu- 
siastic. Around the same time, the New York Times 
had made public an environmental-impact study of the 
site. Some of its conclusions, I felt, would ultimately 
help my cause. Fd always believed that any concerns 
about density were unwarranted. In truth, the West 
Side of Manhattan is relatively underpopulated. Ac- 
cording to the census, the area declined in population 
from 245,000 in i960 to 204,000 in 1980. Only 3,100 
new apartments went up in the neighborhood between 
1980 and 1984. Adding several thousand more hardly 
represents development run amok. 

The study also pointed out several benefits that 


346 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 34? 


would come from the project. For example, the study 
predicted that the West Side would gain business 
worth at least $500 million a year from new residents, 
as well as tens of thousands of jobs, both during 
construction and permanently on the site. Providing 
jobs, in my view, is a far more constructive solution to 
unemployment than creating welfare programs. Final- 
ly, the study found that any added vehicular conges- 
tion in the area — a major concern among some critics — 
could be eased by improvements in local subways and 
the addition of a jitney service, which I’d already 
proposed. 

Even after moving the location of the world's tallest 
building, I began to believe that I might also have to 
make a change in architects. 1 liked the fact that 
Helmut Jahn was an outsider, but I think it hurt us 
with the people at city planning. No one at the 
commission ever seemed quite comfortable with Hel- 
mut. It was never anything more specific than that, 
but in the end I felt that was enough. If the project 
was going to move forward, there had to be some 
spirit of cooperation. Reluctantly, I decided to make a 
change. 

A lot of people were surprised that I chose Alex 
Cooper. Even more than Richard Meier, Cooper was 
Jahn’s antithesis. Legendarily civic-minded, he’d built 
his reputation as an urban planner, served five years 
on the City Planning Commission, and helped write 
the rules of the planning process I was now going 
through. Along with his partner at the time, Stanton 
Eckstut, Cooper had just finished work on the master 


plan for a development at the southern tip of Manhat- 
tan called Battery Park. The critics loved It, calling it a 
classic example of enlightened urban architecture. 

I wasn't a total fan of the Battery Park project 
myself. For example, while the project was situated on 
the waterfront, many of its apartments faced other 
buildings and therefore had no water views at all. In 
addition, I felt that a number of the buildings were 
totally undistinguished architecturally. However, Coo- 
per’s contributions to the master plan — the placement 
of streets, parks, and other amenities — I did like, and I 
felt he could bring some of those ideas to our site. 

I had first interviewed Cooper in October 1985, 
shortly before going public with the Helmut Jahn plan 
for the site. There were already indications that the 
city might have problems with the way we’d designed 
our open space, and I was interested in hiring Cooper 
to work with Jahn just on that. Working together 
didn’t appeal to either of them, however, so I put the 
idea on the back burner. 

I called Cooper again in May 1 986 and offered him 
the chance to take over sole responsibility for the 
Television City job. In my opinion, he was the guy 
best positioned to get my project moving forward. As 
for him, although we ought have been on different sides 
of the fence in the past, what smart, ambitious archi- 
tect could pass up such an opportunity? Television 
City was probably die best and most challenging 
design job available anywhere. It was about time, I 
challenged Alex, that he got associated with some- 
thing big and bold, instead of small and precious. To 


i 


348 ■ TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story * 349 


his credit, Alex jumped at the opportunity. “My God,” 
he told a reporter later, “it’s three quarters of a mile of 
Hudson frontage, so you don’t lightly just walk away.” 

We had our differences, but I quickly discovered 
that Alex had far grander instincts than many people 
realized, and we got along better professionally than 
most people assumed we would. Alex added more 
streets and pedestrian walkways providing direct ac- 
cess through the project to the waterfront. He designed 
parks that were easily reached by anyone coming from 
outside. We agreed to increase the number of build- 
ings and to make each one a little smaller. In front of 
the taller buildings, Alex added townhouses as a way 
of varying the scale. 

What Alex didn’t do was substantially reduce the 
amount of overall square footage below what I be- 
lieved was necessary to ensure the project’s economic 
viability. Still, his changes plainly had an impact. 
Suddenly we started getting more positive feedback 
from city planning. When we unveiled the plan public- 
ly on October 23, 1986, even our toughest critics were 
more enthusiastic than they’d been about the original 
plan. The head of the local community board, John 
Kowal, still objected to the superskyscraper, but he 
described Alex’s new approach as a “brilliant answer 
to Trump’s desires” and “a far better plan." 

Cooper himself, who’d been skeptical of the size of 
the project at first, grew more enthusiastic as he got 
more involved in the design. In April 1987, he told the 
New York Times, “I hope that the project can be dealt 
with on its merits. The problem is that the anti- 


development spirit in this city is very, very strong ri ght 
now. What we are trying to do at Television City is 
different. There is room by the river, and we are 
providing a level of public amenity that makes this 
immense size justifiable — parks, waterfront prome- 
nades and so forth. The world’s tallest building de- 
mands an extraordinary situation. But if there is any 
place that such a skyscraper makes sense, it is here." 

I couldn’t have stud it better myself. 

As for attracting NBC to the site, I felt our cause 
got a boost when General Electric purchased RCA — 
owner of NBC— in mid- 1986. I knew Jack Welch, Jr., 
the chairman of GE, and he struck me as a brilliant big 
thinker who would immediately see the advantage of 
locating NBC on a site like Television City. Welch 
went on to name Bob Wright, one of his top GE 
executives, to head NBC, and 1 got the same feeling 
about Wright. They are exceptional men — even if they 
don't choose my site. 

At the time GE took over, NBC had been actively 
considering no less than four New York City sites, in 
addition to the one in New Jersey. In January 1987, 
NBC announced that aside from the possibility of 
remaining at Rockefeller Center, they’d narrowed their 
choice to just two sites: ours and the marshland owned 
by Hartz Mountain Industries in Secaucus, New Jer- 
sey. Eliminated from the competition were three other 
New York City sites. 

The result was to make the issue very simple: either 
NBC came to my site, or they moved to New Jersey. 
The city had already announced a willingness to offer 


350 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


Comeback: A West Side Story ■ 351 


NBC tax concessions, mostly in the form of property 
tax abatements, as an inducement for the network to 
remain in New York. The question now was whether 
they’d offer a package competitive with New Jersey’s 
proposal. 

Incredibly, the city seemed content to sit back and 
do nothing. I say incredible because in early 1987, 
Mobil Oil, one of the largest corporations in the 
world, announced that it was abandoning New York 
and moving to Virginia. A short time later, J. C. 
Penney, another huge employer, revealed that it too 
was leaving, and taking along many thousands of jobs. 
You’d think the city, faced with yet a third big compa- 
ny threatening to leave, would spring to action. Not 
under Ed Koch, however. 

In late February 1987, the Daily News ran an 
editorial that I thought captured the dilemma perfectly. 
After suggesting that the loss of NBC would be “a 
major blow to the city — an enormous loss of jobs, 
revenues and prestige,” die editorial addressed the 
significance of my site. “Television City is far from a 
certainty,” it said. “The project must work its way 
through die city approval process, where anything 
from bureaucratic inertia to political cowardice can kill 
it. That’s not a case for City Hall’s blindly accepting 
Trump's plan in toto. But it is an argument for 
swiftness and efficiency in making crucial yes-or-no 
decisions. The goal of city policy must be to keep 
NBC home. The worst possible result would be to lose 
it to cowardice.” 

In my view, that’s precisely what was happening. 


Early in May 1987, I went to the city with a proposal 
for a tax-abatement program that would make it possi- 
ble for me to offer NBC a deal competitive with New 
Jersey’s. Alair Townsend, the city’s head of economic 
development, had said herself that without abatement, 
NBC stood to save up to $2 billion over a twenty-year 
period by moving to New Jersey. 

I suggested a deal under which I’d build NBC’s 
headquarters myself, at a cost of between $300 million 
and $400 million. I’d also subsidize NBC’s rent for 
thirty years by charging only $15 a square foot, which 
is less than half the break-even rent. Finally, I’d agree 
to give to the city 25 percent of any profits Television 
City earned for a period of forty years. In return, I’d 
get a twenty-year tax abatement on my entire site. 
Even then, my savings would begin only when I got 
the project up, which was years away, at best. In the 
meantime. I’d be subsidizing NBC out of my own 
pocket, to the tune -of at least $30 million a year. 

Ironically, there was almost total opposition to my 
offer within my own organization. Robert, Harvey 
Freeman, and Norman Levine felt that for me to agree 
to give NBC $30 million a year in subsidies before we 
knew what revenues we’d be earning was too great a 
risk. My feeling was that the risk was worth taking. A 
tax abatement for our residential apartments would 
make them more marketable. In addition, NBC would 
be a prestigious addition to the site, and a lure. For the 
city, it was no-lose: they put up no money at all to 
keep NBC, and in lieu of taxes they’d share a substan- 
tial percentage of any profits we ultimately earned. 


352 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


My proposal sparked the first serious negotiations 
we’d had with the city. Ed Koch didn’t participate, but 
the city officials under him seemed receptive to the 
general structure of the plan. On May 25, however, 
after more than three weeks of intense negotiations, 
Ed Koch turned the deal down cold. I’m convinced 
that he made the determination not on the merits, but 
rather because he didn’t want to make any deal with 
me — no matter how good it was for the city. 

The next day I wrote Koch a letter that I’d held off 
writing for more than a year. “Dear Ed," it said, 
"Your attitude on keeping NBC in New York City is 
unbelievable and, I predict, will lead to NBC leaving 
the city, as so many other major companies have, for 
New Jersey,” I again ran down the benefits of keeping 
the network, and ended by saying, “I am tired of 
sitting back quietly and watching New Jersey and 
other states drain the lifeblood out of New York.” 

Koch replied exactly the way I expected him to. He 
refused to respond to my specific points, and he tried 
to turn the issue into a personal contest of wills — Koch, 
the great protector, against Trump, the greedy devel- 
oper. For months, he’d been looking for a way to get 
back at me for embarrassing him by building Wollman 
Rink so quickly and efficiently. The West Side yards, 
he apparently decided, was the perfect vehicle. When 
I came back with yet another suggestion for saving 
NBC — selling nine acres of my site at below my cost 
directly to the city — Koch rejected it without so much 
as a discussion. 

I can’t say I was surprised when the New York Times 


Comeback: A West Side Story • 353 


came out against my plan. The writer of the editorial 
was longtime Koch ally Herb Sturz. Until joining the 
Times editorial board only a few weeks earlier, Sturz 
had been head of the City Planning Commission, with 
specific responsibility for Television City. In my view, 
letting Herb Sturz write editorials about New York 
City is analogous to permitting Caspar Weinberger to 
write editorials about Reagan’s military policy. 

I did get strong editorial support, however, from the 
Daily News . "The mayor is correct in saying there are 
limits to how much the city can give NBC,” the News 
wrote. "But that’s no excuse for inaction. Koch should 
personally bring together the decision-makers from 
NBC, Rockefeller Center and Thimp’s outfit. He should 
lay out a strong plan — and knock heads if that’s what 
it takes.” 

Instead, Koch offered NBC a half-assed, watered- 
down tax-abatement proposal, which he said they 
could apply at any Manhattan site they chose. He even 
offered a little free advice about some new sites they 
might consider. Free advice, of course, tends to be 
worth what you pay for it. No sooner did Koch make 
his suggestion than an NBC spokesman said the net- 
work wasn’t interested in considering- more sites. In 
the meantime, the executives at Hartz Mountain Indus- 
tries weren’t sitting idly by. Recognizing an opportuni- 
ty to force NBC’s hand, they announced on June 1 
that the network had thirty days to accept the terms 
that they were offering and which New York was no 
longer willing to match. 

There were some who told me that I was hurting my 



354 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


chances for zoning approval by taking on Koch in the 
media. They may well have been right. But I felt there 
was a bigger issue at stake. I’ve come to believe Ed 
Koch is so incompetent and destructive to New York 
that someone has to stand up and say so, publicly. 
When the Daily News polled its readers as to whether 
they agreed with Koch’s position on NBC or with 
mine, the results were very satisfying. Nearly 10,000 
readers sided with me. Only 1,800 went with Koch. 

I’ve waited a long time to build on the West Side, 
and I can wait longer to get the zoning I feel is 
necessary. In the end, I will build Television City with 
or without NBC and with or without the current 
administration. 

I continue to keep all my other options open too, 
because, as I’ve said, it’s the only way you truly 
protect yourself. If the residential real estate market 
remains strong, FU undoubtedly do very well selling 
large, overview apartments in that location. If the 
market generally falls — and that can only be tempo- 
rary in a city like New York— I may choose to build 
only the shopping complex. 1*11 do very, very well just 
with that. 

My time — and Television City’s — will come. I’m 
lucky that I can afford to wait, because that way Til be 
able to do it right. The one thing I know is that Til be 
doing business in New York City long after Ed Koch 
has moved out of Gracie Mansion. 


14 

THE WEEK 
THAT WAS 

How the Deals 
Came Out 


I said AT THE start that I do it to do it. But in the 
end, you’re measured not by how much you 
undertake but by what you finally accomplish. 
What follows is an accounting of how the deals that 
crossed my desk in the week I chose to describe have 
since turned out. 

Holiday hiw 

Several weeks after selling my Holiday stake for a 
profit, which was substantial but not the reported $35 

355 


356 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 




Hie Week That Was: How the Deals Came Out • 357 


million, I began purchasing stock in another casino 
company, Bally Manufacturing Corporation. In a short 
time, I accumulated 9.9 percent of the stock. Bally 
responded by adopting poison pill provisions aimed at 
thwarting any attempt at a hostile takeover. When they 
also sued to try to keep me from buying any mote 
stock, I countersued. 

Two days after I initiated my suit. Bally announced 
an agreement to purchase the Golden Nugget casino at 
the highest price ever for an Atlantic City casino, 
almost $500 million, including the cost of the bonds. 
Once again, the real goal seemed to be to thwart me. 
No company is legally permitted to own more than 
three casinos in Atlantic City, and if I took over Bally 
after they'd purchased the Golden Nugget, Fd own 
four. 

In effect, however, they put me in a win-win posi- 
tion. By paying such a huge price for the Nugget, 
Bally could only serve to increase the value of all 
casinos in town, including the two l already owned. 

In the end. Bally offered me a settlement 1 couldn't 
refuse. I agreed not to stand in the way of their 
purchase of the Nugget. In return, they agreed to buy 
back my 9.9 percent stake in their company at an 
average price much higher than I paid, giving me a 
profit on my brief investment of more than $20 million. 

In March 1987 1 made my third attempt to purchase 
a casino company. Resorts International, but this time 
on a friendly basis. In the wake of the death of Resorts 
founder James Crosby, several other parties had launched 
bids for the company, but none had been successful. In 


the meantime, I*d developed a close relationship with 
several members of Resorts who controlled the 
company. In April 1987 I came to an agreement with 
the family to buy or tender for 93 percent of the voting 
stock in the company at $135 per share. 

Several other bidders subsequently offered a higher 
price, but the family stuck by our agreement. Among 
other things, they believed I was the bidder with the 
best credentials to complete construction on Jim Cros- 
by’s pet project, the Taj Mahal on the Boardwalk. De- 
signed as the largest and most lavish hotel-casino in 
the world, the Taj Mahal had already gone many 
millions of dollars over budget and was still nowhere 
near completion at the time Crosby died. 

I hope to have the Taj open by October 1988. In 
order to create a more efficient operation, I may close 
the casino in the existing Resorts facility adjacent to 
the Taj Mahal and use it to service the Taj. Of course, 
1 could always sell it to another casino operator for the 
right price. Who knows? Maybe Bally or Holiday Inns 
might be interested. 

Annabel Hill 

We ended up raising more than $100,000 for the 
Annabel Hill fund, which we used to pay off her 
mortgage and save her farm. To celebrate, we flew 
Mrs. Hill and her daughter to New York, where we 
held Trump Tower atrium’s first — and, I suspect, its 
last— mortgage-burning ceremony. 


358 • TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


United States Football League 

The owners voted unanimously to appeal the ruling 
under which the USFL was awarded just one dollar in 
damages, despite the jury’s antitrust finding against 
the National Football League. 1 think the grounds for 
an appeal are as strong as our original case. 

Wollman Rink 

Hie rink came in at $750,000 under budget and 
opened a full month ahead of schedule in November 
1986. More than a half million skaters enjoyed the 
rink during the first year. Before the opening the city 
predicted a major operating loss. For the first full 
season of operation, we earned almost $500,000 in 
profits — all of which went to charity. 

Palm Beach Tower* 

Lee Iacocca became my partner in the purchase of two 
condominium towers in the Palm Beach area, which 
we bought for approximately $40 million. When we 
took over the project, only a few units had been sold. 
In a short period of time, operating in a glutted market 
for condominiums in southern Florida, we sold or 
sale/leased nearly fifty units and managed to turn a 


The Week That ffn: Ho w the Deals Came Out ■ 359 

bankrupt operation into a big success story. During the 
next year we intend to open a major restaurant on the 
ground level of one of the towers. Among thr«p 
who’ ve bid for the space are the owaers of toe 21 Club 
in New York, and Harry Cipriani, owner of Harry’s 
Bar. Sir Charles Goldstein was dismissed as counsel to 
Lee before the deal was concluded. 


The Australian Casino 

Although we were among the finalists being considered 
to operate the second-largest casino in toe world (after 
the Thj Mahal in Adantic City), I thought better of it at 
the last moment. The idea of running a business which 
is a twenty-four-hour plane trip from New York City 
just didn't make sense — particularly when I have so 
much to occupy my attention in my own backyard. 
Shortly before the decision was to be announced by 
officials in New South Wales, I let them know that I 
was withdrawing my bid. 


The Beverly ESDb Hotel 

The hotel was finally sold to the highest bidder, 
oilman Marvin Davis, for a price far in excess of what 
I was willing to pay. After having the property inspected, 
I kept my own bid low. Of course, should Davis ever 
choose to sell, I’m sure he’ll earn a profit. 

Marvin Davis subsequently became one of the bidders 


360 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


for Resorts International as well. After I’d already 
made my deal, he not only offered a higher price but 
also tried to get the Murphy and Crosby families to 
renege on their agreement with me. They refused, and 
the court approved my deal, after which the New 
Jersey Casino Control Commission also approved it by 
a 5-0 vote. 

Right around the same time, I happened to be at a 
fabulous party in California thrown by Merv Adelson 
and Barbara Walters, and a reporter asked me about 
Marvin Davis’s bid for Resorts. Kiddingly, I said that 
Davis, who happens to be terribly overweight, should 
focus on losing 200 pounds instead of wasting time 
trying to break my deal with Resorts. I heard later that 
Davis was incensed by my remark, but I can’t say I 
felt bad. I don’t go out of my way to be cordial to 
enemies. 


The Parking Garage 

In October 1986, several months after construction on 
our new parking garage had begun, I got an emergen- 
cy call one morning, just before I was scheduled to 
make a speech to a group of businessmen in New 
York. My construction manager, Tom Pippett, was 
calling. It seemed that the operator of a huge megaton 
crane had reached his boom out too far for a pickup, 
and the result was the crane and a twenty-two-ton 
beam toppled over onto the garage. Pippett told me 
that a huge section of the garage had Literally col- 


The Week That Was: How the Deals Came Out ■ 361 


lapsed. “What about the workers?” I asked. “Was 
anyone hurt?' ’ 

He told me that at least a hundred men had been 
working on the site and that a head count was under 
way. 1 told him to keep me posted, and went off to 
make my speech, trying to put the issue out of my 
mind while I spoke. As I was walking out after the 
speech, I was handed a message from Tom. I called 
back immediately, "You’re not going to believe this, 
Mr. Trump,” he said, “but we’ve accounted for ev- 
eryone, and no one was hurt.’’ 

Losing even one life would have been horrible and 
devastating. In this case, only the sheer luck that the 
men at the site happened to be working on another part 
of the garage at that moment saved their lives. 

It goes to show you how fragile it all really is. 
Those men were very lucky, and so was I, 

The job was finished without further incident. In May 
1987 we opened 1 ,200 new spaces in the parking facility 
connected by a walkway to Trump Plaza on the Board- 
walk. During the week that followed, our slot-machine 
revenues more than doubled — mostly from the increased 
pedestrian traffic through our facility. By July, we had all 
2,700 parking spaces opened, along with the bus termi- 
nal and the limousine dropoff — all on time and on budget. 

Las Vegas 

I withdrew my application for a gaming license in Las 
Vegas. Between Resorts and my two other casinos in 



3*2 • TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 


The Week That Was: Hew the Deals Came Out * 363 


Atlantic City, I had enough to occupy me in the casino 
business closer to home. My focus now is on Atlantic 
City, but I don’t rule out building or buying in Nevada 
at some point in the future. 

The Tramp Car 

A decision has been made to go into production on two 
Cad iliac-body limousines using my name. The Trump 
Golden Series will be the most opulent stretch limousine 
made. The Trump Executive Series will be a slightly less 
lavish version of the same car. Neither one has yet come 
off the line, but die folks at Cadillac Motors Division 
recently sent over a beautiful gold Cadillac Allante as a 
gift. Perhaps they felt I needed more toys to keep me busy. 

The Drexel Deal 

I decided not to go forward with the hotel company 
deal that Drexel Burnham Lambert brought me, and I 
have continued to keep all my investment banking 
business with Alan Greenberg and Bear Steams. It’s 
been a rough time for Drexel. 

Tramp's Castle 

I said you can’t bet against Ivana, and she proved me 
right even sooner than I expected. When die figures 


were announced for the first three months of 1987, 
Trump’s Castle had the biggest increase in revenues 
among all of the twelve casinos in Atlantic City and 
was the most profitable hotel in town. The Castle took 
in $76.8 million in those three months — a 19 percent 
gain over the comparable period during the previous 
year. Good as that performance is, there is no way 
Ivana will be happy until she’s far outdistanced the 
field. 


Gulf & Western 

I’ve been continuing to talk to Martin Davis, the 
chairman of Gulf & Western, about the theaters. In 
addition. I’ve since purchased a great deal of stock 
in the department store chain Alexander’s. The 
chain’s flagship location between 58th and 59th 
streets and Third and Lexington avenues, next to 
Bloomingdale’s, is another perfect site for theaters — 
as well as for a mixed-use commercial and residen- 
tial skyscraper. 


Mar-a-Lago 

The pool and the tennis court are finished, and both 
are as beautiful as I’d hoped they would be. As little 
as I’m interested in relaxing, I enjoy Mar-a-Lago 
almost in spite of myself. It may be as close to 
paradise as I’m going to get. 


364 * TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL 


The Week That Was: How the Deals Came Out * 365 


Moscow Hotel 

In January 1987, 1 got a letter from Yuri Dubinin, the 
Soviet ambassador to the United States, that began: 
“It is a pleasure for me to relay some good news from 
Moscow.” It went on to say that the leading Soviet 
state agency for international tourism, Goscomintourist, 
had expressed interest in pursuing a joint venture to 
construct and manage a hotel in Moscow. On July 4, I 
flew with Ivana, her assistant Lisa Calandra, and 
Norma to Moscow. It was an extraordinary experi- 
ence. We toured a half dozen potential sites for a 
hotel, including several near Red Square. We stayed in 
Lenin’s suite at the National Hotel, and I was impressed 
with the ambition of the Soviet officials to make a 
deal. 

Tramp Fund 

I decided against setting up a separate fund to buy 
distressed real estate, using money raised from outside 
investors. I don’t mind taking risks myself, but the 
idea of being responsible for the money of a lot of 
other people — particularly when they’re bound to in- 
clude some friends— just wasn’t appealing in the end. 
For the same reason. I've never been tempted to take 
any of my companies public. Making choices is a lot 
easier when you have to answer only to yourself. 


My Apartment 

The renovation on my apartment was finally finished 
in the fall of 1987. I could afford to take my time, apd 
I’m happy that I did. There may be no other apartment 
in the world like it. 


Airplane 

I finally found a plane. I happened to be reading an 
article in Business Week in the spring of 1987 about a 
troubled, Texas-based company named Diamond Sham- 
rock. The article described how top Shamrock execu- 
tives were enjoying incredible perks, actually living 
like kings. Among the examples cited was a lavishly 
equipped company-owned 727, which executives flew 
around in at will, 

I sensed an opportunity. On Monday morning, I 
called the office of the Diamond Shamrock executive 
who had been pictured on the cover of the Business 
Week article. It turned out that he was no longer there 
and a new chairman, Charles Blackburn, had just been 
named. I was immediately put through to him, we 
talked for a few minutes, and I wished him well. Then 
I said that I’d read about the company's 727, and that 
if he had any interest in selling, I was interested in 
buying. Sure enough, Blackburn said that as much as 
they all loved that plane, selling it was one of the first 


366 * TRUMP: THE ART OP THE DEAL 

things on his agenda. He even offered to send it up to 
New York, so that I could take a look at it. 

The next day I went out to La Guardia airport for a 
look. I had Us smile. This plane could seat up to two 
hundred passengers, but it had been reconfigured for 
fifteen, and it included such luxuries as a bedroom, a 
full bath, and a separate working area. It was a little 
more plane than I needed, but I find it hard to resist a 
good deal when the opportunity presents itself. 

A new 727 sells for approximately $30 million. A 
G-4, which is one fourth the size, goes for about $18 
million. However, I knew that Diamond Shamrock 
was hungry to sell, and that not very many people are 
in the market for 727s. 

I offered $5 million, which was obviously ridiculously 
low. They countered at $10 million, and at that point 1 
knew I had a great deal, regardless of how the negotia- 
tion ended. Still, I haggled some more, and we finally 
agreed chi a price of $8 million. I don’t believe there is 
any other private plane in the sky comparable to this 
one. 


What's Next 

Fortunately, I don’t know the answer, because if I did, 
that would take half the fun out of it. 

This much I do know: it won’t be the same. 

I’ve spent the first twenty years of my working life 
building, accumulating, and accomplishing things that 
many said could not be done. The biggest challenge I 


The Week That Was: How the Deals Came Out * 367 

see over the next twenty years is to figure out some 
creative ways to give back some of what I’ve gotten. 

I don’t just mean money, although that’s part of it. 
It’s easy to be generous when you’ve got a lot, and 
anyone who does, should be. But what I admire most 
are people who put themselves directly on the line, 
Fve never been terribly interested in why people give, 
because their motivation is rarely what it seems to be, 
and it’s almost never pure altruism. To me, what 
matters is the doing, and giving time is far more 
valuable than just giving money. 

In my life, them are two things I’ve found I’m very 
good at: overcoming obstacles and motivating good 
people to do their best work. One of the challenges 
ahead is how to use those skills as successfully in the 
service of others as I’ve done, up to now, on my own 
behalf. 

Don’t get me wrong. I also plan to keep making 
deals, big deals, and right around the clock. 
